{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 
line number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1853481\rsid3411055\rsid8265103\rsid12783972\rsid14954898}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min8}{\version5}{\edmins4}
{\nofpages21}{\nofwords5668}{\nofchars32311}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws37904}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace0\dgvspace0\dghorigin0\dgvorigin0\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot8265103 
\fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid1853481 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid8265103 Lancaster University
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Interview ID:  PM27
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs16\insrsid1853481 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid12783972 21}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs16\insrsid1853481 
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid1853481 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i0\insrsid1853481 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 4}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}04/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid1853481 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid1853481 Date of birth: 1951
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1853481 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 Occupation: Group 3}{\cs21\fs24\super\insrsid1853481 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid1853481 \chftn }{\insrsid1853481  }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Group 1 }{
\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1853481 

\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1853481 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i0\insrsid1853481 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i0\insrsid1853481 
Well initially it was more the business it affected.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 Right.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid1853481 Because I\rquote m a partner in the business and it was the income really that you were concerned about because all the night we weren\rquote t earning anything.  It just stopped completely.  And naively on the 1}{
\fs24\super\insrsid1853481 st}{\fs24\insrsid1853481  of March we called staff back and laid them off and thought we would be working within a fortnight.  Um, but unfortunately we weren\rquote t.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 So how did events unfold?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Well I think everybody got into the same mood, farmers that we 
talked to and that.  I mean we became in a certain way, we became somebody to phone up and chat to because people felt lifeless and it was lovely that people did that.  We could share their problems and it was so horrific for the people who went down with
 
Foot & Mouth at the beginning.  I can remember one man calling me, no I phoned him, because I started phoning people after they went down, and all our customers, I phoned them when I knew.  Because continually we were on the phone to the Ministry finding 
out who was the next one, who was the next one.  And um I used to phone them all up and sort of just have a bit of a chat.  And one man, a 40 year old man he just couldn\rquote 
t fake, he was in tears, and he was always the person who came on and spoke to me, pulled me leg, chatted away, great character, and he couldn\rquote t speak to me.  And I came off the phone and I was just in tears.  And I said, \'93I\rquote 
m not gonna phone anybody up\'94 I couldn\rquote t after that.  And so I used to send them cards and people\rquote d phone up and thank me or they\rquote 
d send me something back and it was lovely.  Um, but it was everybody lived for the news bulletins.  You used to sit and even farmers, when you were talking to people, they used to flick from BBC1, ITV, Channel 4, and you just lived flicking ch
annels, listening on teletext seeing what was updated.  And one didn\rquote 
t correspond with the other and then phoning (21) every 5 minutes to find out who was the next one or getting on the internet.  Because everybody wanted to know, they wanted to know what was happening and it was the fact that there wasn\rquote 
t the information, people didn\rquote t know, they were all in the dark.  And they were all so frustrated because they didn\rquote t know and events sort of escalated so quickly.  Um, and out of control.  And even though
 government and ministers and everybody um, assured everybody it was under control, it was never under control in the beginning.  And it was only when the army came in that people breathed a huge sigh of relief um, they definitely did.  Everybody, didn
\rquote t m
atter who they were if they were farmers or not, I can remember seeing animals laying in fields that you thought that it was cats sitting down and then you realised they were lying there dead.  I never, well I did actually see some sheep slaughtered, whic
h was a pure accident because I happened to be walking past and I didn\rquote t know they were slaughtering them.  Um, but that was horrible seeing that.  Er, I don\rquote 
t think people should have been shielded from it I think people should have seen it, they should ha
ve really understood what it was all about.  The pyres, seeing the pyres built and some of them were in public places on public roads and seeing them burning.  And I remember going over a main road and counting them and I could see 14 pyres burning in one
 go and the smell yeah, was horrible.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 I guess your life changed?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Yeah, it was, it was a whole, a whole different life which wasn
\rquote t so bad in a way.  I mean, that sounds daft really but in January we\rquote ve been sort of saying things have got a bit mundane you
 know, never in a million years thinking what was gonna happen.  But yeah you were chugging along and you were making a living and you know.  But I mean I\rquote 
ve got like 15 years before I retire and I kept thinking, well this is life until I retire, you know 
its just the business had been going along enough it had settled down, everything ticked over.  But I needed more than that.  And then all of a sudden Foot & Mouth and you think no, maybe it was better just ticking over.  Yeah, you life did change because
 I was used to getting up at half 6 in the morning and getting home at half 4 at night.  Um, from morning going into work, we weren\rquote t going in till 9, 10 o\rquote 
clock cause there was no point, coming home at dinner-time.  My life changed because I didn\rquote t have much to do.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 Yeah, how was the business affected?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Dramatically because we just couldn\rquote 
t do anything at the beginning.  Um, we fought to get jobs for the staff in the Ministry,  which took a heck of a long time, it was very frustrating.  Two of the partners went into the Ministry and we decided between us that I\rquote 
d stay on at the business, so I was the only one there er, going from being nine people about I was 1.  So yeah it was isolated to a certain extent but in another way I enjoyed that because I had the 
contact with the people.  I felt I could keep up with the rules and regulations and do whatever I had to do so you felt important as well.  But it was all a lot different, but it was different for everybody because they were all doing different jobs as we
ll.  And they were frustrated being in different jobs, they\rquote 
d been used to being their own boss and being able to make decisions and in Defra, no decisions could be made, they were frustrated.  But I was involved in that because the partners used to meet up and we\rquote 
d talk and I could hear what they were going through as well, so that was quite good, you know and we could have a laugh about it, which was the important thing you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 You must have built your business up over a long time?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Yeah, we did, 10 yea
rs, 10 years and overnight it went.  We had the business valued it was, it was valued in December when Foot & Mouth broke out in February, the December before we had it valued in excess of \'a3
300,000.  And during Foot & Mouth we had it valued again and it was worth \'a350,000.  And we knew because the business wasn\rquote 
t re-sellable, nobody would buy it and that was the main aim especially sort of with the future towards retirement to build the business up as a saleable asset.  We built it up from nothing in the beg
inning, we had nothing when we started and we built it up to be that value and overnight it just went.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 That must have been very worrying\'85
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 
Yeah, yeah, it was worrying but there again it gave you an incentive it gave you something to aim for because as I s
aid before life had become a bit mundane but then again you have a challenge again.  So it was interesting, it was um, as I said I felt really sorry for the ones in the beginning that went with Foot & Mouth.  But as time went by and all the rumours, specu
l
ation and everything that was going on, I began to change my views, I became more concerned about the ones who were left.  Um, you know they really struggled, they really er, you know were in a desperate situation.  I mean even disinfectant, they had to b
uy their own disinfectant.  The ones who\rquote d gone down, who had the compensation it was compensation, um, they had nothing, there was no help for them, they couldn\rquote t move anything, they couldn\rquote t sell anything and they were in \'85\'85
 well I put them on par with us because we couldn\rquote t do anything, they couldn\rquote 
t do  anything.  And it was the unknown.  The people with Foot & Mouth, yeah it was horrible, they had the cows or whatever stock slaughtered.  But they could move on with their lives.  When they knew they had 
it, there was a future but anybody else was stuck, we were stuck for months and months and that was \'85.. well it was, the business is like ours, or the people who still retained the stock had no future.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 Were you getting any information\'85
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Only with hassle a lot of hassle that we had.  I mean, we\rquote 
ve always had quite good contacts and we know people in various departments and that.  But um, it was only through purely just keeping at people to find out what was really going on.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 So when did you start working again?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 
Yeah, we were slowly allowed to, started disseminated.  A lot of it we weren\rquote t allowed to go on farms, which again we didn\rquote t want to be responsible for spreading Foot & Mouth, nobody did.  Um, and we were very conscious you know of 
that.  But we were allowed to do certain things as time went on which weren\rquote t feasible because we had to have again conformed by regulations we had to have different premises, it was all cost, which again we didn\rquote 
t want to incur more costs when we had no income anyway.  Um, so it was round about November we were actually allowed to start and it slowly built up, yeah there\rquote s restocking and that but during Foot & Mouth there\rquote 
s been various alternatives to using in the AI [Artificial Semination] service and people have used them and probably they will keep with them.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid1853481 Right, do you think they\rquote ll continue to use them?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1853481 Yeah, yeah, you can\rquote 
t blame them.  An AI service did not make money it runs as a loss it\rquote s the sale of semen and other product\rquote s which keeps the business ticking over.  Prior to Foot & Mouth I wouldn\rquote t have ever said to a farmer you know, \'93
buy our semen or whatever\'94 but now I will definitely, I have no qualms about saying to a farmer, \'93you support us or we\rquote ll go\'94 its as simple as that.  And gone are the days when we used to run about and do things for nothing, we can\rquote 
t afford to do that, we\rquote ve changed the whole structure of the business.  And its allowed us to do that we couldn\rquote t have changed  \'85\'85  Before we did have some things that were uneconomical as time went by er, we couldn\rquote 
t have changed them without a lot of problems.  But because of Foot & Mouth we could do it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Have you had any help?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah,  I mean all the money that\rquote s banded about and all the millions and that that\rquote s mentioned a lot of its, when they start looking into it, yeah we got \'a3
8,000 we applied for 8,000 we could have had a lot more, but it was a bank loan and we don\rquote t owe money, we have no overdraft.  We have never been in a position of owing money to anybody and we didn\rquote 
t want to get into that position.  So yeah we\rquote ve got \'a38,000 a marketing grant and we had a web site and we improved our computers, did a brochure.  But if we couldn\rquote t have marketed we wouldn\rquote t have lasted 10 years.  We didn\rquote 
t need money to market but it was there and we utilised it, whether or not it\rquote ll be any use in the future um.  We also a wonderful fund, the Addington Fund}{\cs21\super\insrsid1853481 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid1853481 \chftn }{\insrsid1853481  }}}{\insrsid1853481 
, they were absolutely brilliant, they really were good.  And I mean he still keeps in touch the gentleman concerned, his lovely.  And I mean I just purely met him by sitting at a, cause I really made, I\rquote 
d got to keep Insem [insemination]  going, I had to keep Insem highlighted to be there because everybody had too many other things to think about but I had to still ke
ep the name going.  And so therefore I went to television and radio and kept highlighting it.  I met this gentleman from the Addington Fund at one of these things and he was brilliant, really was.  And it\rquote s a wonderful organisation, I\rquote 
m sure it will have helped an awful lot of people. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 How do you feel about the future of the company?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Future of the business?  Um, its an interesting time its gonna be wholly different than it has been for the last 10 years.  But I think we\rquote ve all really realised that we\rquote ve just got to go with the flow, whatever happens we
\rquote ll adapt.  If, if at the end we don\rquote t succeed it\rquote s through no fault of our own.  Um, we\rquote re gonna give it our best if you know we\rquote re not there, they\rquote re not there, but that\rquote s all we can do.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Looking back now do you sort of think, how did I get through that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Sometimes,  yeah, sometimes.  Um, because I\rquote d go home and your mind would be full of it.  I\rquote d ring people at night, the phone never stopped, , the phone was the lifeline for everybody.  Um, and you\rquote d be on 
for hours um, and yeah you felt drained, everybody felt drained I think.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 So what got you through?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 I don\rquote t know, I suppose talking, talking to other people really.  It depends what type of person you are.  I mean,  I am quite an emotional person you know, and my voice breaks before I do, but I am, but I\rquote 
m an angry person, I can be angry as well and I have fought so hard sometimes I was so angry cause I think this is it, everybody went through the emotions of tears and feeling down and depressed and then you\rquote d get angry.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 What was the worst thing about last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Frustration.  The lack of knowledge of people.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 The rural community or the general public?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Both general public.  It didn\rquote t matter where you went if you were standing in a queue buying a loaf of bread or in a shoe shop or whatever, everybody talks, overnight everybody was an expert and t hey weren\rquote 
t.  The majority of people had no idea and it was you know, you just wanted to tap somebody on the shoulder and say, \'93no you don\rquote t know that\rquote s wrong\'94 you know.  And there was so many ignorant people, they weren\rquote t ignorant \'85
\'85 they were only ignorant because they didn\rquote t understand and Foot & Mouth disappeared off the media and whatever
 and its been cleared up in about June because the tourist industry had to get back on track and there was so much highlighted about the Tourist industry.  And that used to annoy yer.  I mean I\rquote 
m a walker, I walk the fells, there was no way I would have walked, I wouldn\rquote t, I wouldn\rquote t have done it.  Um, so no it was, I don\rquote t know it was a combination of things really. [laugh]
\par 
\par I think the tears, the tears of people.  Er, just because you couldn\rquote t, all right you could talk but you couldn\rquote t comfort people you know, you couldn\rquote t.  I mean the majority of our customers, I would walk pass them in the street I don
\rquote t know them, I don\rquote t see them, so I don\rquote t know them, I know the voices.  I know if what the wives are called,  I\rquote d know if they went shopping to Newcastle last Tuesday but I don\rquote t know what they look like.  And yet I
\rquote m so close to them even though I don\rquote t know them.  And that\rquote s what it was they were phoning up just to speak, just to have somebody to talk to.  And I think that was happening in a lot of firms.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 But I guess in a sense it was different, they were used to talking to you on the phone anyway.  It must have been quite natural to ring them and chat?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah, yeah, because I don\rquote t think of the customers as customers they\rquote re friends, even though as I say I don\rquote t know what they look like, I don\rquote 
t. It was, it was finding the right words to say to people you know um, to sort of sympathise but cheer them up and its getting a happy medium really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 But at the same time you obviously had problems with your business as well
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 
Yeah, yeah, I mean luckily we were fortunate we could still, financially we could still pay ourselves.  We did feel concerned that we might have to pay redundancy to our staff.  But again we were thinking about (185) and redundancy would(185) 
would have crippled us.  Um, but fortunately I mean, they all went off and did other things and that didn\rquote t happen in the end.  But I mean it could have cost us a lot of money to have to pay redundancy.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Have you got any staff working for you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 We only have one.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think you might have more by the end of the year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No, there just isn\rquote t the work.  And as I say we\rquote ve changed business to be more economical, so no.  I\rquote ve always wanted in 7 or 10 years to get bigger and bigger and better and now as we got b
igger over the years we became in effect less profitable.  Um, because once you have to pay more staff wages, more vehicles, etc, and if your not getting the revenue back in for that increase.  So by staying smaller um, we should go back to being more pro
fitable.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 So I suppose it\rquote s given you an opportunity to think again about everything\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Definitely complete revamp of the business.  Um, we were the first AI service in Cumbria to start up as an independent in \rquote 92.  Before that it was all a monopolised industry.  So we had a vast knowledge and everybody that\rquote 
s set up after us has contacted us or come in and we\rquote ve shown people and things like that.   And as I say I\rquote ve always wanted to get bigger and now we\rquote re gonna go back to being probably one of the smaller.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Um, do you think that the general public considers that FMD had gone away?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 I would like to think it is.  I would like to see April come round and get April, May out of the way, I don\rquote t know, I don\rquote t know.  I mean, I\rquote 
ve heard this week that TB has been brought into the cattle, with a herd.  And that\rquote s a worrying fact.  What else is imported?  Er, I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think people realise that it\rquote s still affecting businesses like yours?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No not at all.  Not unless the family or somebody whose directly involved, no.  Er, because businesses like ours haven\rquote 
t been given the publicity, its tourism yes, always tourism, but they are not thinking about the stone-waller, the mole catcher, little businesses, that are all reliant on farming.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think that the farming community pulled together?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes definitely.  The farming community has always been renowned for being so close, would do anything for anybody, er cause there\rquote s been so many fall-outs in the families.  And that\rquote s 
because ones gone down with Foot & Mouth and had compensation, etc, and bragged about it and the other ones struggled on to survive doesn\rquote t go down very well its human nature.  So yeah, I think they\rquote 
ll be vast changes in farming community which is a shame because as I said it\rquote s tight-knit, they\rquote re all inter-related, they\rquote re all inter-married.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think things will ever get back to normal again?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 I don\rquote t think we\rquote ll know farming as farming anymore, a normal, what is normal?  It\rquote s a whole new world, and I think farming needed a new world.  I just hope it\rquote s a better world really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Did you ever feel like things were moving outside your control?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah every day at the height of it.  Um, as I said the other night I can remember sitting down and drawing circles on maps and saying, \'93right well I might as well shut down\'94.  Er, we couldn\rquote 
t shut down we had semen stored in liquid nitrogen, we couldn\rquote t shut the door and walk away, that was other people\rquote s property that we had.  Um, you know and just like I said this farmer\rquote 
s wife who walked up and down the road for hours just lost, just thinking the whole stock would be slaughtered.  And again everybody phoning everybody and flicking tele-text and watching Nick Brown stand up in the House of Parliament with a proposal 
and changed what it said and everybody had video\rquote d it and rewound it and er, it was just unbelievable.  All the little episodes like that.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Looking back now, do you feel you had any confidence with people who were running the FMD operation?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No, nobody.  The only confidence I ever had in anybody was when er, I have forgot his name, which is awful.  Birtwhistle, no, came in.  And like everybody and I\rquote 
m sure he must have had thousands and thousands of letters because we wrote to him, and said, \'93thank you\'94.  And I think Cumbria breathed a sigh of relief when he came definitely.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 What about MAFF?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Absolute crap.  Really useless.  The higher management should have been got rid of, yes, the government were under stress and strain I understand it just completely overwhelmed them but they didn\rquote 
t utilise the people they could have utilised.  They had people who knew the area like the back of their hand and yet they were using people off the street and hadn\rquote t a clue where the places were.  I mean, I\rquote ve met a vet from A
merica and she knocked at my door when I was living in the country then, one day and asked me where to go and that.  And she came in, and she\rquote d been set up with a map and just go and she\rquote 
d been driving round the countryside for four hours and she just wast
ed four hours you know. And yet it must have been awful at DEFRA sitting at the phone and getting the abuse and everybody, cause I mean I was phoning a lot and I was one person, multiply that up.  But instead of, I mean, we\rquote 
ve got a computer programmer and she\rquote d even tried to get into to improve their programmes on their systems because everything you asked them they couldn\rquote t find the information, they just didn\rquote t have the computer \'85\'85. They weren
\rquote t using technology enough to help them.  And they had standard replies it was obvious they were reading off a piece of paper and things like that and you felt at the end you knew more than they did, which often you did.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Yeah.  What about DEFRA now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 DEFRA will never alter, when it was MAFF, DEFRA doesn\rquote t matter what you call them um, to a certain extent they\rquote re all built in the same mould, the old civil service, the ones who\rquote ve been in there a long time, you won
\rquote t alter them.  It\rquote s got to have a clean sweep and change completely.  Yeah they\rquote ve got to hav
e rules and regulations everybody admits.  I mean, our rules and regulations are supposed to be reviewed three years ago, before Foot & Mouth hopefully they might get round to doing it now.  But no unless DEFRA changes and I\rquote 
ve yet to meet one person if there was anything good to say about DEFRA.  The Field Officers, the slaughterers,  the people who were on the farm amongst the \'85\'85
 the ground people yes speak highly of them or the majority they do but not anybody in authority you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 What do you think about the way the media handled FMD?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Border Television was absolutely excellent they really were.  In a way they seemed to stick to high profile people which was probably wrong to a certain extent.  They had the NFU representatives always on and the same \'85\'85 they weren
\rquote t getting to the average people, yeah, it was the same old people.  And then MAFF got criticised because it looked as though they were just after glorified sort of life really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Right, did you listen to Radio Cumbria?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Hmmmmm yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 And what did you think about their coverage?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 We were on Radio Cumbria about four times.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Were you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes, yes, I thought it was good, very good.  And they went out and spoke to, they spoke to little cafes, they spoke to businesses like us, yeah they went out and they got the individual, so they were very good as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Right\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah, yeah because people can relate to other individuals but when you keep getting, they had a few officials keep coming on same person time after time, you know, you needed the individuals, you
 needed somebody to come out in a Cumbria accent and say, \'93oh its great\'94 you know and they were just down-to-earth, normal, \'93me wellies aren\rquote t dirty anymore\'94 your not having some sort of, \'93
oh we had this discussion and er we have decided to\'94 [speaking in a posh voice] you know \'85\'85  You know they were just normal, every day people and that\rquote s what people wanted.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think a lot of people\rquote s lives changed as a result of Foot & Mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah I think personally as well um, I mean it made me, well whether it was Foot & Mouth or not but I mean I do probably put it down to that.  But, when Foot & Mouth started in February I didn\rquote 
t realise in July that I would be walking out on me husband after nearly 30 years. You know and that was circumstances.  So I mean I\rquote ve been married nearly 30 years and on July 23}{\super\insrsid1853481 rd}{\insrsid1853481  I just thought enough
\rquote s enough and I walked, I had no clothes, I had nothing.  And yeah things worked out but I think it made me um, whether Foot & Mouth and how life was at that time gave me the courage or the confidence or just to think, well life\rquote 
s short, enjoy it and I don\rquote t think I\rquote d have done it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Right, so last year had a dramatic effect on your life?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 
Yeah, yeah, definitely.  Yeah, and knowing um, that I had to go and tell me family and everything that went on at that time you know, me husband was in two days of me leaving, took an overdose which was er, bad.  You know all that emotion.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 It must have been a stressful time all round for you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes well I had nowhere to live, I had no clothes, I had nothing, just I had an un-secure income cause I didn\rquote t know what I was gonna get from the business and yet I still did it.  I must have been made to a certain e
xtent.  But um, you know it just makes you think.  Now when I look back I never thought I would have such a nice place as this and life can be so different.  I\rquote 
d been used to coming home, cleaning, cooking, washing, ironing, doing the garden and now I come home and I can tidy up in five minutes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 I was going to ask you whether you thought anything good has come out of Foot & Mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah, be good or bad I don\rquote t know, time will tell really.  But yeah I\rquote ve moved on in my own personal life, I\rquote ve kept the you know, what I have probably always known I had to do but couldn\rquote 
t do.  Um, and it made me do something about the future.  Um, so yeah I can just see, well hopefully, I mean still, everything is still up in the air and there\rquote s still an awful long way to go fo
r everything to be sorted and that.  But yeah I see that personally, hopefully is gonna be a good thing for the business.  Again hopefully its gonna be a good thing because its gonna hopefully make it more profitably because we\rquote 
re gonna change the working practices.  Um, we won\rquote t be as tied to work as we were.  So yeah, the future is different, a lot different.  Er, but you\rquote ve got to be positive and hope it is gonna be better.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Um we talked a bit on Thursday night about this project and what might come out of it.  I don\rquote t know if you can think of anything that you feel should come out of the project?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Well I think I was probably very cynical and I am cynical because you\rquote re always conscious of, there\rquote s always this money being spent and all these reports and r
esearches or whatever and nothing concrete ever comes out of anything, nobody listens to anything.  Um, yeah I would like um, but at the end that something is listened to and you can see \'93yeah by taking part in this, this happened or this affects this
\'94.  Not it\rquote s a load of paper and it\rquote s a load of people going round and just wasting, well not wasting time but being paid to do research but at the end of it, its all shoved in a drawer and nobody ever reads it.  But we\rquote 
ve all been paid, we\rquote ve all got this grant and whatever, but what\rquote s the point of doing it if there\rquote s no concrete thing at the end of it?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Yeah.  What are the lessons do you think?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 That the people who were directly involved and affected should have had more help at the time definitely. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 What sort of help would have been useful?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 If they\rquote d been somebody or a department or something that um, had been more knowledgeable.  There has been a meeting, I know that wasn\rquote t possible cause people weren\rquote t going anywhere because they didn\rquote 
t wanna move.  But I remember going to some meeting, you know, sort of like for people who were complaining about things and they were quite militant and you didn\rquote t want to be involved with those people, you wanted to be there just to sit and \'85
\'85 an informal chat really, you know what was needed, just for people to get together.  I mean in all the villages round here and all the villages that were affected, there\rquote s the village hall, they weren\rquote 
t utilised, you know, they could have had village hall meetings and just a cup of coffee, a biscuit, just to get people together.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Through people that might be\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah, yeah, and there again same old story people moan about these things and then they\rquote ve got an apathy that they just won\rquote t go along, you know if somebody organises something just don\rquote t go along, they don\rquote 
t support it because they say, \'93oh no I\rquote m not going\'94.  Just like me, I\rquote ll come to yours, I\rquote ll be interested and whatever, but my other two partners don\rquote t wanna know.  And that\rquote s because they don\rquote 
t want you know they don\rquote t see the  reasoning  behind it and that\rquote s what your get amongst most people.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Can you think of anything else that might have helped you through?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Proper financial assistance not packages.  Yeah it took us a long time to get our rates deferred.  Um, and even now we don\rquote t know really what\rquote 
s happening till next year or what.  Um, the companies that we dealt with for our cars, um and sort of leasing the building and anything financial that was a problem that we had commitments to.  It would have been nice if they could
 have been sorted out a lot easier than it was, cause that was another hassle of trying to sort out our commitment.  Um, you don\rquote t want a bank to \'85\'85 well we didn\rquote 
t want a bank to lend you money, we just wanted to be able to er, pay our own way.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Was your bank supportive?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yeah, yeah, I went in to see them.  I mean, financially we\rquote ve always been sound and we\rquote ve had money in the bank you know, so I mean we had a good background to do that.  We didn\rquote 
t get to the stage that we needed an overdraft or anything.  But we could have got to that stage but we didn\rquote 
t but it was only by our own means, by cutting everything to the complete bone, which we did.  It was about April time when we realised things were gonna drag on and we just cut everything down as far as we could.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Um do you think that your health\rquote s been affected by the events of last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Probably but it\rquote s. . . . which events really.  Um, well I was, yes I was definitely going through the menopause I think before Foot & Mouth and I was getting hot
 flushes and dizzy spells and all things like that.  And that stopped.  And I put that down to less stress really which sounds daft er but it did stop.  Um, yes, smoked more, definitely smoked more and I drank more definitely.  Um \'85\'85.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Due to the stress?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Well I did stop smoking actually for about 8 weeks but I\rquote ve started again.  Um, yeah, no they are reasonable acceptable now.  But they weren\rquote t acceptable, they weren\rquote 
t definitely.  I mean, I was coming home sometimes from work 2 o\rquote clock in the afternoon and having a drink you know.  I didn\rquote 
t want one but I had one because it was just, you were getting rid of the time you could sleep without thinking because when you slept you thought.  I mean a few times I woke up crying for no reason, no reason at all.  Um, and I\rquote 
d never done that in me life and I just put it down to what was going on.  Um, but no I mean drinking was getting absolutely ridiculous, really was, so yes.  And once personal circumstances to Foot & Mouth had eased that was able to be control
led.  But I wish I could give up smoking now.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Did you ever try and get any professional help?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No, no.  Um, I think because I\rquote d changed home in the middle of this and changed doctors as well.  I think when I went tot he doctor\rquote s for a repeat prescription for something else um, and I read on the computer that he
\rquote d got \'93business suffering, marriage problems, but seems to be coping\'94 and that was about it.  And I thought yeah.  But yeah, no, I did cope you know but no it wouldn\rquote t have been a doctor or it would
 have been more friends or family that I would have spoke to, not a doctor or a nurse, I think because they are close to you they can understand.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 What do you think about the future now?  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 I have different days, um yeah I think, I do feel positive because it\rquote s a whole new world to me, everything\rquote s new.  It\rquote s not just the business its personal life as well is new.  So yeah I\rquote 
ve got to be positive about all of it, because it\rquote s all new.  Um, so yes I mean its gonna be different and that but hopefully at the end its gonna be better.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Um is there anything I haven\rquote t asked you, that you think is important?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No I don\rquote t think so.  Um, as I say it\rquote s more the emotions that strikes  me about Foot & Mouth, its people\rquote s emotions that is the biggest thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think the general public understand the relationship between farmers and their livestock?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No.  Well because to the general public animals are slaughtered food, they don\rquote t realise the dairy cattle stay in a herd for, can be 10, 12 years and that a farmer handles that cow at least twice a day, it\rquote 
s like a pet.  Um, but they just see it as a food chain, well it was gonna be slaughtered anyway, so why worry?  But dairy cows aren\rquote 
t sheep, they are a different aspect, except the hefted sheep or the minor breeds those are probably the exception.  But dairy cat \'85\'85
. Anybody would have got rid of the sheep and here they were queuing up to give their sheep away to save the cows.  Um, but cows, they just were, the public perception of cows wasn\rquote t right, they didn\rquote 
t understand, but that was lack of knowledge.  Why should somebody who lives in the middle of Manchester understand you know, a cow is a cow, and that\rquote s it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Do you think the public was generally on the side of the farming community during Foot & Mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 At the beginning probably but as money was bandied about and how much compensation that people were getting, especially when individuals mentioned millions and things like that
, that really annoyed people.  And um, sort of why should they pay?  Why should farmers get it?  You know if um \'85\'85.
\par 
\par \'85. Cows had been slaughtered and they couldn\rquote t tie the two together or get the perception of it.  Yeah, which is, it is a shame that um, even someone, I mean I\rquote 
m talking towns-people, its not always necessarily towns-people its even people who live in the country and who don\rquote t have any association with farming.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Yeah.  What do you think of this issue from the perspective of small businesses?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 It\rquote 
s a very big issue er definitely.  Um, I mean I think again you have your own personal view but to me we are unique because we were licensed by DEFRA to be allowed to work and they stopped us working and their actions  ruined our business.  So yes comp
ensations a big issue to small businesses and I don\rquote t think \'85\'85 it\rquote ll probably go on for years.  But yeah I think a lot of small business\rquote s will fight to get compensation.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Are you going to fight too?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes we are yes.  Er, we had our compensation claim in with DEFRA from April of last year and we keep following it up.  We were told, and I\rquote ve got letters from, I mean I\rquote 
ve written to every minister, European Parliament, Prince Charles, President Bush, I\rquote ve written to everybody um, and we just keep getting standard reply saying there\rquote 
s no compensation for related businesses and things.  But we now, with a group that are putting an action together so hopefully something \'85.. but yes, a lot of businesses will claim definitely to try to.  And I think well that\rquote 
s the only way that we are gonna recoup what we have actually lost.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 In some ways it must seem frustrating that farmers got compensation?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Well compen\'85\'85 will I prefer to, like they say compulsory purchase.  The stop was compulsory purchase, there is no doubt about that, it\rquote 
s the evaluations that were given on those animals and yes some of the blood lines will never get back, but some of the figures that they were given were absolutely ridiculous.  Um, and it
 was a case of knowing which value to get, to get better price and all this.  I mean all this was bandied about, I mean, they weren\rquote t daft and all the um, the way that the farmers had boasted about it, that is the frustrating thing.  There\rquote 
s been young farm lads going in pubs and singing \'93we\rquote re in the money\'94 in pubs.  You know, and I mean, there\rquote s been two or three really I\rquote d knock to bits because people are so angry that \'85\'85 and that\rquote 
s when you can understand why people have no sympathy because they\rquote re bragging about \'85\'85  There\rquote 
s never been as many new cars, new tractors, conservatories go up in Cumbria than there has this last year.  You know it does annoy people when they\rquote ve had businesses that have struggled.  And the \'a315 an hour that was set as a claiming
 thing, I mean, farmers would have done that, for \'a37 an hour most farmers were losing money hand over fist, they would have grabbed their hand off at \'a37 an hour.   But you\rquote ve got everybody jumping on the band-wagon you\rquote 
ve got people coming from the dole.  And people all of a sudden they were a cleaning expert, they had cleaning teams 30, 40 people and they sat back in an office and employed people for a fiver an hour and were getting \'a3
15.  And they were just raking it in.  You know it just always seems so unfair.  But as well after saying that it wasn\rquote 
t their fault because that was the money that was set, that was what was put down.  But there was no control over that, there was no monitoring of, well there was a monitoring at the end of it but I mean, a lot
 of people could have said they worked 40 hours and they worked 10, you know it wasn\rquote t \'85\'85 they didn\rquote t have the resources to monitor it but they just accepted everything.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 How do you think politicians handled this?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 David McClean [Pnrith and the Borders MP] was absolutely brilliant and I was never a lover of David McClean er, but he, and I don\rquote 
t think anybody in the county would say any different, his been absolutely brilliant through Foot & Mouth.  Um, Tim Collins down at Kendal was also very good, um I don\rquote 
t know who the Labour person is round here, but you never heard from him.  Um, or anybody else, Liberal Democrat or any of these.  Er, the European Parliament, the Labour person they had was really good he wrote a few letters on our behalf.  Um, but no Da
vid McClean was outstanding definitely.  And I think he must have, I remember phoning him the day that Nick Brown stood up and said, \'93all cattle in Cumbria would be slaughtered\'94 and I phoned him in London and I couldn\rquote 
t get through.  I tried for seven hours.  And I did get through to him and it was an answer machine and obviously everybody in Cumbria was phoning him and he phoned me back at 10 o\rquote clock at night.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Did he?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 And he said he\rquote d been inundated and he had, I know he had and yet he did, he phoned me with just a little thing saying \'93is it true?\'94
  You know, and he did, he kept in contact, he um, he followed letters up, he was enthusiastic I saw him at um, we went to his clinic and I spoke to him and the papers were piled high and yet he still had time f
or you and that.  So he was, he was really good.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Was that important?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 Yes, yes, when you felt that the government was completely useless and not in control that somebody, somewhere in that position in Government, even though they were in opposition would be fighting.  So yes it was important
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Er, have you got anything to ask me?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 No,  not really no.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 Thanks a lot for that.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1853481 I do go on \'85\'85..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1853481 
\par }}