{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 
line number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid9175049\rsid13239933\rsid13328916\rsid14907713\rsid15542048}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min35}{\version4}{\edmins0}
{\nofpages28}{\nofwords5823}{\nofchars33194}{\nofcharsws38940}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace107\dgvspace180\dghorigin2551\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot13328916 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid15542048 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid13328916 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid15542048 
\par Interview ID:  PM31}{\insrsid15542048 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs16\insrsid15542048 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid9175049 28}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs16\insrsid15542048 
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15542048 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 4}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}04/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid15542048 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Date of birth: 1956
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15542048 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 Occupation: Group 3}{\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid15542048  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15542048 
\par }}}{\insrsid15542048 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15542048 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i\insrsid15542048 This interview took place in the kitchen of the respondent
\rquote s home. We sat at a big table. The respondent still has not replaced stock and her husband was also in the house. He joined us part way through the interview and took part in the discussion.
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 \'85what do you remember about the start of it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 My first memories of the outbreak was I was at my part-time job at the auction mart and a chap came in and said 
\par \'93Oh there\rquote s foot and mouth in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose} today\'94 . And I thought oh, gosh, that\rquote s, in this country.  The following day I then heard that it was 
in Northumberland, and my immediate thoughts was, that\rquote 
s the next county to us. Then after that things just seemed to get worse and the next day it was at Longtown which is in our own county. But even then Longtown is a long way from where I live at, and your biggest thought was \lquote will it get to us?
\rquote   But yet Longtown was about 30 miles away and you thought its a long way from here and you just hoped it wouldn\rquote t get here. (pause)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So what happened about your job, cos you work for an auction company don\rquote t you?}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par That\rquote s correct, on the Friday we heard that all livestock movements had been stopped, I got a phone call from the market saying 
\par \'93I\rquote m sorry, erm, you\rquote ll have heard on the news that there\rquote s no livestock movements therefore the market won\rquote t be operating and we won\rquote t need you next week\'94
 . I am quite sure that at this stage everybody thought this would just be for a small, you know, few, a small number of weeks.  We then got a letter, erm, to all the part-time staff the following week and saying that the sit
uation as they understood would be reviewed in three weeks,  so in the meantime they were sorry they couldn\rquote 
t offer us any further employment for the following three weeks but they would contact us again after that.  Well, after that obviously the situatio
n just went from bad to worse in this county and er, we realised then that there was going to be no auctions for quite some time.  At that stage looking at my own life personally erm, because my routine of the Tuesday and the Thursday going to work had go
ne, to be quite honest I hardly knew what day of the week it was,  I would say \lquote what day is it day today?\rquote   
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par And my husband and daughter would say 
\par \'93How do you not know what day it is?\'94  But because my routine was totally disrupted I felt it difficult 
to even know what day of the week it is.  This was a situation I just got used to and then unfortunately outbreaks got nearer, and they got nearer all the time.  And when the neighbour at one side got it and then another at the other side got it,  just ab
out a mile away from us we then had to think \lquote it\rquote s not }{\ul\insrsid15542048 are}{\insrsid15542048  we going to get it but it is }{\ul\insrsid15542048 when}{\insrsid15542048  are we going to get it\rquote 
, then unfortunately that did happen.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 And up to then you\rquote d carried on milking as normal and having the deliveries.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 We did yes, erm, we never went anywhere, erm, but we had to have our milk collected alternate days and we had to get deliveries of feed and what have you for the cattle at that time.  Shopping was restricted \lquote 
til you were absolutely desperate for shopping really, you waited \lquote til you had a big list and erm, like we were never short of anything but you didn\rquote t think \lquote oh well I\rquote ll go to shop today\rquote , you wait \lquote 
til you were really needing it.  When outbreaks were bad out  erm, Carlisle area and then Wigton we certainly avoided those are
as, and I tended to go to Keswick or to Cockermouth for my shopping where you felt you know you were rather safer like really. But everybody did what they could to minimise the, the you know the risk of catching it like really.  My daughter was at school 
and when outbreaks got nearer then she had a week off. Then, because she was coming up to SATS and exams she went to stay with a friend for a fortnight who\rquote 
s from a non-farming family. Erm, about ten miles from here, and they put her up for a fortnight. Then that brought us up to the Easter holidays and we felt as though we couldn\rquote t sort of ask this friend to have her con\'85
 you know non-stop really so she\rquote d come home for the Easter holidays.  And then the arrangement was after a fortnight at home because we weren\rquote t leaving the farm, you know, she wasn\rquote 
t travelling anywhere with it being the holidays,  she would possibly go back after that. But the week after that the outbreaks just got nearer and nearer and we decided that she\rquote d better have another week off school at that time. So that\rquote 
s what she did and in the mornings, er, I tended to, we got up and your first thought was what are we going to find when you get out there. My husband looked round the beef cattle and the younger cattle.  I looked round the dairy cattle and if I didn
\rquote t go to find him it was a good sign, and consequently, if you know, vice versa if he didn\rquote t come to find me then we thought it was a good sign, that there was nothing amiss on that day, like really.  And..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Obviously it was on, from what you are saying you sound as if it was on your mind all the time.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Oh, it certainly was, anybody connected with agriculture or had livestock you couldn\rquote t get away from it at all. It ha
d affected some of our friends by that time and erm, well, if your telephone rang late at night it was a bad sign because it was somebody telling you that there neighbour had it or your friend had it, and there again, if it rang first thing next morning t
hat was another bad sign, because you knew then it was going to be bad news for somebody.  You listened\'85 we, well, we relied a lot at that stage on Radio Cumbria for all our information, because at that stage we didn\rquote 
t have a computer and we weren\rquote t connect
ed to the internet.  So, we got all our information from Radio Cumbria and to be honest, many a time they listed outlying farms that had been affected and working in the auction mart I tend to know a lot of people and often you knew  8 out of those 9 peop
le and you know it was hard to deal with.  (upset at this point)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 You still find it upsetting
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Erm, difference of days I think really, but  you know, it all comes back to you.  (upset here)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Have you .......}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par We\rquote ll have a break. 
\par (switch off tape, make tea. After this break respondent was noticeably less formal and more relaxed)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 You\rquote re working at the estate agents?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Yes, I was really quite fortunate that our auction company had an estate agent\rquote s office which is further down in the town.  In August, end of July beginning of August they\rquote 
d a member of staff erm, off ill, and they had another member of staff that left to have a baby, and they offered me alternative employment in that office.  So that was a nice change, because it got some routine back into my li
fe it erm, it gave you a purpose to get up for in the morning apart from just washing}{\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn }{\insrsid15542048  Post-infection cleaning of buildings, yards}}}{\insrsid15542048 
 and what have you. So, yes I felt that was an advantage being able to go and work in that office then.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Were you doing your own cleaning and disinfection here?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Yes we were, er, my husband was doing it. I was helping him on the days I wasn\rquote t you know at work at all.  He also, we had a nephew of his who was on holiday from university who would come and help us
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par  In the summer, then unfortunately MAFF, DEFRA as they now call it said 
\par \'93Stop cleaning \lquote til we get you all a contract\'94
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Right yes
\par }{\insrsid15542048  So we were on hold then for seven and a half weeks and of course during that time this lad\rquote s holidays slipped away.  By the time we got 
our contract he had gone back again, so he was no longer there to help my husband with all the cleaning, but er he battled on and battled on and er got all the job done. But it was a long slow process because we have a lot of traditional buildings here as
 well, as well as the new ones, and it was the old type buildings that took all the time of cleaning like really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Did he have, have any effects, health effects do you think, from the cleaning?  Did you notice anything?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Erm..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 .... with the chemicals}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par I wouldn\rquote t say too much from the chemicals but er, when he was washing then you got splattered in your face and that you, you know. Certainly the lad who came to help him he wasn\rquote t from a farm and he didn\rquote 
t realise that when you pressure washed a wall that everything got blown back in your face and what have you.  They did spend a lot of long hard days doing the cleaning, but doing it himself on his own farm he\rquote 
s then sure that he made a very thorough job,  and I think that was the most worrying part that nothing was missed or anything and I feel as though he did a very thorough job on the er, on the cleaning side.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 And you\rquote re out, and you\rquote ve had all that passed now have you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Yes, that, we were all signed off from that on the, in the beginning of December. 
 But it was a long slow job, particularly with the seven and a half weeks missing, which unfortunately in that seven and a half weeks that was all in the good weather and the longer days so 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par By the time we got started again it was September and er, he er, you know the days were short and nights were drawing in and it it was a longer spell doing it.
\par 
\par (Husband came into kitchen, tape switched off, we introduce ourselves, he gets a cup of tea and joins us at the table.)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So did, we were asking about health effects and things, whether the disinfectant bothered you, but B thought not, did you notice any other effects like your eating or sleeping.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well, we certainly didn\rquote t sleep.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 What, before of after the cull?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I was grand up \lquote til, up \lquote til the cull, and then from the cull onwards we were lucky if we had three, four hours of constant sleep,  you know, you were always wakening up four o\rquote clock in the morning, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par H: and you, you couldn\rquote t get to sleep at night you were just er lying there, you know just thinking of, of er, of about what had gone on really.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I think when the outbreaks got nearer I had two or three nights of no sleep at all when got to this neighbour at this side and then t
his side and you know that was the stage you began to think well when  not if, like really eh?  Er, being dairy farmers we were used to wakening up in the morning at half past five anyway.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par  But now when you have no stock then I\rquote m afraid you wake up sooner than that and you can\rquote 
t get back to sleep like really, eh.  So we started going to bed later, thinking well, if we went to bed and hour and half later we could perhaps sleep for an hour and half longer in the morning but er unfortunately that didn\rquote t h
appen either like, does it?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 How about your daughter?  Has it affected her?}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par Erm, yes I would think so, cos she used to help us out on the farm as well and, everybody had their friends out there and you know the animals were you friends. She\rquote s certainly not as keen on farming as what she used to be, she\rquote 
s sort of career choosing 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par and options choosing stage at school erm, and at the moment childcare is what she\rquote s talking about she never mentions being a farmer at all, now does she?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 No, no}{\insrsid15542048 .
\par 
\par But, you know its her choice at the end of the day, we wouldn\rquote t be forcing her into anything like really, but er, she seems to have lost interest as opposed to anything else like, anyway, hasn\rquote t she?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H:I don\rquote t think anybody wants us to farm at the minute though,  but when you read these magazines and listen to the news and that they just er, I think they\rquote re quite happy just to import everything really, they don
\rquote t really want farming, well not in this area anyhow, that\rquote s the opinion that you seem to get when you talk to other people in the area, think everybody in the same, the same opinion really which doesn\rquote 
t help your enthusiasm or motivation really.  But we know nothing else so we\rquote ll start up and carry on again.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So, I think you said at the meeting, you\rquote d bought some cattle sometime.....}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par That\rquote s right.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Dairy herd....}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par Yeah, we\rquote ve got a small herd found, its just a case of knowing, when we\rquote re able to bring them here when the parlour\rquote s sort of been reinstated 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par and regulations allow isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well, thats r
ight yeah, but I mean this is another thing you know were still waiting of DEFRA to come and erm, check our electric over, you know we were cleared on the fourth of December of disinfect, with disinfecting  and everything and we\rquote 
re still waiting to er switch the electric on outside, because er
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Well, its the fourth of February now .....
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well, it is that\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: That\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Yeah it\rquote s two months since.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And er we\rquote re still waiting for them to come and er, officially check the electric over and let us progress.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So presumably are you paying for the keep of those cattle at the moment?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well no, but erm, come, come the middle of February we thought when we looked at them we thought by the middle of February we should have everything in place to erm..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 To move them really
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: But I mean the speed that DEFRA works er,  (laughs),  I wouldn\rquote t like to say when er, when they\rquote ll come.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well they were quite happy to keep them \lquote til then weren\rquote t they, but there again their crop situation wasn\rquote t too clever down there because of regulations last year so, something \lquote 
ll have to be happening by then I would think anyway won\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yeah uh um.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Has it changed the way that you feel about work, erm, the way that you\rquote ll be working, do you think you\rquote ll change at all?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I
 think its given us, well to be mebbe a difficult one to answer that, erm your lifestyle was just snatched away from you last year. Erm its given us time to rethink some parts of it and, and what have you but er, it was just such a sudden enforced change 
I think that was the, you know, the shock to the system, really more than anything.  You can only sort of do with your buildings and your land what\rquote 
s, you know what is suitable for them like erm depending on each farms layout and the buildings and what have you . So, as far as I can see we\rquote ll just have to be returning to what we were doing before but  the milk prices don\rquote 
t help and the regulations don\rquote t help er,  it seems to be just er, you know, difficult situation that we\rquote re in at the moment really. The country still accepts imports without a lot of screaming with people and they don\rquote 
t seem to get checked as they come off aeroplanes and what have you, so you just think well if this situation\rquote s caused by, you know, imports of meat what have they done to stop this from happening again?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 You\rquote re worried that it\rquote ll come back?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Yes, I think that\rquote s got to be at the back of everybody\rquote s mind now if it could come back. There hadn\rquote t been an outbreak since \lquote 67 or sort of thing, and before that, so it had never been high on people\rquote 
s thoughts during that time but I\rquote m sure its uppermost in most livestock farmers minds still now.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 How\rquote s it affected your wider family, do you have relatives who\rquote re farming, older relatives?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I\rquote ve got a brother who\rquote s, well we both have er, brothers and sisters that\rquote s farming, erm my brother\rquote s just sort of two to three mile away from here and he, he was fortunate not to go down, 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Uh huh
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par H: Erm, but on a wider scale its put quite a rift between erm farming, between farmers in general, them that have gone down and them that haven\rquote t gone down.  Cos the ones that\rquote s been left have sort had brunt of all the, I mean we\rquote 
ve had a lot of washing out and a lot of work but, unseen work, but they\rquote ve been stuck with a lot of cattle that they\rquote ve never been a
ble to  er move because of the regulations right in the early days. And then when they did get chance to move them they were bringing erm, well they were robbing them of you know, for what they could\lquote 
ve got through the auctions really but because there was no auctions they had to direct to 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Slaughterhouses and that
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: slaughterhouses and you know, and they weren\rquote t paying a fair price for them really like.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Its also cost them a lot for disinfectant and what have you, like to just to supply it for there own gateways and what have you, you 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par know throughout this time it\rquote ll be gallons and gallons that they\rquote ll have gone through like really eh, and that\rquote s more unseen costs like isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 And then there was, you know, Over Thirty Months animals, you know when an animal goes over thirty months er its not allowed to go into the food chain, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes, yes
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par H: well these people that were fattening cattle, quite a number of these animals went over thirty months, so they got nothing for them, you know, they just got their 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 The over thirty month price
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yeah, \lquote stead of the fat, \lquote stead of the fat price which they would have been, you know, and there\rquote s been nothing said or done about that which it wasn\rquote 
t their fault that er that they lost out on that. So er you know sort been quite bit of, there\rquote s been a, you would say a rift between them that\rquote s gone down and them that, that hasn\rquote t eh?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I don\rquote t think we would ha\rquote  like to have been the only farm in this like village or locality that had gone down.  At least there was them that had lost there stock and them that hadn\rquote 
t and you know we were in contact with those that had lost their stock 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par Cos we were, you know, in the same wavelength as them like really but I wouldn\rquote t have liked to have been the only one in the village that had lost their stock if everybody else had still been farming.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Do you think there is resentment there?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I think there\rquote s little bit in some er, respects yes, there is, but er you know those people that didn\rquote t lose their stock they don\rquote t have their memories of that day
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I don\rquote t think anybody round about feels that it was our fault that foot and mouth came into this area or, or likewise with any other neighbour.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
H: Erm you know that was just one of those unfortunate things that happened. But erm, I think its just the fact that them that still had their stock were, well they felt they still had all this extra work on and the extra burden of trying to move th
em from one field to another across roads and\rquote  that which they, they just couldn\rquote t er, couldn\rquote t do. And a lot of them had very little grass and then we had acres of grass
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Loads of grass
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And we couldn\rquote t er
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 And we couldn\rquote t help them out with it nor anything
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: We couldn\rquote t really use it, you know, because of, because of er the situation that we were in.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Did you make forage?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yes, we did, aye,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048  So it\rquote s stored is it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well we\rquote d make big round bales and\rquote  wrap them, and\rquote  they\rquote re still in the field you see, we couldn\rquote t bring them into the buildings, so they\rquote re still out there in the fields,
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Which was an extra expense to us because we had two good silage pits
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That we\rquote d normally have used.... years ago we used to make round bales didn\rquote t we but we put silage pit up and got rid of that job we felt, but went back to it this year
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Did you have your own machinery, or did it cost you as well to get a contractor on?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: No, its cost us \lquote cos we had to get a contractor in,
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 We had to get a contractor
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yeah, and now it\rquote s that wet we can\rquote t, can hardly get them out of the field.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 And it was also very difficult for contractors because they had some clean farms and some, like ours which was a dirty farm, \lquote and well they had a queer jo
b, you know, deciding which order to do the, you know, their work in. And then the weather would break and you were back to square one, so it hasn\rquote t been easy for anybody like farmers, contractors, or, or anyone at all.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 At the meeting you were talking about the differences it made to your social life and how awkward you felt when you first went out again, do want to say a bit about that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well, at first we, we didn\rquote t really go far but I did say we went to Carlisle one day and, Michael went to the football match and we went into the town and I really felt as though we shouldn\rquote 
t have been there really because you know, you didn\rquote t know who you were going to meet on the street. And you felt if you did meet somebody, were they thinking, \lquote oh they\rquote ve just had foot and mouth what are they doing in the town?
\rquote  I think that, that\rquote s certainly gone and has been gone for a long time but when you\rquote d first got it you certainly felt uncomfortable going into public places like, really eh.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 How did your daughter find it going back to school?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well quite a few of her school friends had been through the same situation she had a week off school as most, er families did when they\rquote d suffered it like, really. So she wasn\rquote t the only one when she went 
back there and, her farming friends understood the situation, those that were non farming just said er, 
\par \'93Oh you\rquote ve got foot and mouth eh?\'94  and, and that was it like really because they probably didn\rquote t understand you know what she\rquote d been through at all. S
he actually did have a few extra days off because there was exams on the day that she should\rquote ve gone back to school, so, she wasn\rquote t able to do those erm, all of those because she just simply hadn\rquote 
t been able to revise for them in the week you know, leading up to that like really.  So, but, because Wigton you know, is a school where she attends its from a big catchment area, they\rquote 
d gone through cases of foot and mouth from the early days right through till the end. And the school and the school teachers were quite, you know used with coping with it because they\rquote 
d been, had people suffering from it for a, for a many weeks really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Were they quite good with them did you feel, I mean, apart from just knowing about it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Personally I felt that they were, erm, yes 
even, well a few days afterwards the Head Teacher phoned here to say how sorry he was to hear that erm, that our farm had suffered from it, and also some of the teachers lived fairly locally so, they would also knew, but  you know as I say they would be s
uffering cases in the end of March right through until into May so, the school was very badly affected by it and by attendance at school as well, cos they\rquote re from, you know a lot of them are from the rural area their pupils.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Do you feel anything good came out of it anything positive?}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par Well I think there has to be something good come out of something bad all the time. And I suppose, looking back over the year, as a family, we\rquote ve mebbe done more things together, and spent more time together as a family becaus
e you know, not having staff then we didn\rquote t really have holidays and we didn\rquote t have time off together. Whereas, I suppose this last year then we\rquote ve spent more time together as a family possibly, but you know, you don\rquote 
t want a situation like that to er to arise to make that happen but, there has to be some good things come out of something bad all the time,  I hope anyway.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Personally, as an industry I don\rquote t think its done any good at all, not, not a bit, I think its made it, its made it worse in fact I think.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Farming?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well, yes, of all aspects you know from, from even, from being able to sell anything at the auction, you know when it does get back going again, there\rquote 
s going to be more paperwork and rules and regulations and this is on top of what, what we already have to do with form filling and things like that, . And the I, the way you, you read about it then, and look at it, in the, in the past they\rquote 
ve always condemned factory farming with er, the pigs and poultry sector and you, that\rquote s exactly how those, they\rquote re encouraging the dairy industry to go. , they\rquote 
re wanting them to get bigger and bigger from you know, and everybody that\rquote s gone out and are going back in appear to be going back in putting another fifty or a hundred cows on from what they already had,  And to me that\rquote s not, erm, that
\rquote s going against what they\rquote ve been saying all along about this factory farming, cos there\rquote s no way you can really look after three hundred cows as well as you can do after, you know, fifty or sixty cows, you can\rquote t
 give em the personal attention and, and the management that er, that you could er with the smaller farms.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 And that\rquote s obviously, from what you\rquote ve said about the cattle being in your friends, it seems to be the way that you\rquote ve farmed\'85}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par Yes, I would think so, our cattle erm, they all had names here, they weren\rquote 
t just numbers they all had names and, and known individually.  And you know you could assess them, is this one better than its mother, or is it worse than its mother, if your breeding policies were fo
llowing through, correctly, every one, every generation should\rquote 
ve been better than the previous generation.  And having a small herd you can keep track of them and know which, you know which is mother and which is daughter and, follow the generations through.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 How long have you been breeding your own line?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 We\rquote ve been at this farm since er eighty three, we started here so , nearly twenty years I suppose then really.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: But we both had er, cow families from when we 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Before we were married, like really eh, from both our parents farms, you see when we started we sort of got something with each parent so unfortunately those are the bloodlines you cannot replace at all you see.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I was given one when I was seven, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 And you
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par H: and just bred up from it and, you know, you can\rquote t get them, them animals back again, they\rquote ve gone forever.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Are you going to carry on with the sucklers as well?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Eventually, I think yeah, we\rquote ll just, er we\rquote ll just build from breeding from what we\rquote ve, what we\rquote ve purchased we\rquote ll just er 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par Takes time to go through the bringing up process again though doesn\rquote t it really eh?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: But going back from what I was saying you know, with, with all these herds getting bigger and bigger, they\rquote re just trying to 
er, smother the little man out really and its not going to be practical to be able to, to farm on a small scale any more.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Do you feel that you\rquote ve got any control over that situation, any way that you can (inaudible 247)
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Not re.., at this stage no I don\rquote t think so, because as soon as we send our first load of milk away they\rquote re al.., they\rquote re already going to knock two pence a litre off because we\rquote 
re not sending enough milk.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 They\rquote re going to penalise the people who\rquote re sending smaller volumes away like
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: We\rquote ve got so send over two hundred gallons of milk, well I should say 900 litres of milk, a day, otherwise they\rquote ll knock two pence a litre off your er price.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Is that because of the cost of transport, is that what they}{\insrsid15542048  ..}{\b\i\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well just because they\rquote re encouraging you to go to
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Get bigger like, really eh?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And this is what I\rquote m saying you know, and then they\rquote re sayin you can, you can put a bigger bulk tank in, keep it two or three days but then you can\rquote t turn round and say you\rquote ve got fresh milk any 
more when its been in the tank for three days, so you know, you just feel as if they change the rules to suit there selves.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 It takes time to build up your numbers again you see, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par When we first get started again we won\rquote t have anything like that quantity of milk either will we?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well no, but we haven\rquote t got the acres to keep the number of cows to get in a, you know, if you\rquote re sending enough milk away they\rquote ll give you a penny a litre but there\rquote s no way that we\rquote 
ve got enough acres to be able to er, 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Do that
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: To do that.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So even if you were up to maximum strength
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yeah}{\b\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par You don\rquote t feel you can match what
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: No}{\b\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par They want}{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par H: We\rquote re always goin\rquote  to be, we\rquote re always goin\rquote  be left
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Difficult eh
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Left a, left a penny, or a penny and a half less than the, than somebody that can send a lot of milk away
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 And these small margins are very vital for your viability like really anyway eh, penny and a half doesn\rquote t sound very much but it is when it comes down to the bottom line at the end of the month like, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par its very vital really isn\rquote t
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Start multiplying it
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That\rquote s right, it does make a difference yeah.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And the way they keep going for the environmentalists,  I think the smaller farmer \lquote ll look after his, his farm on, on a you know better scale than the, the large men won\rquote 
t have time to, go round doing all these other little projects. Where a small man, he can you know, he can milk his, his cows, and look after his stock and then get out and erm do the fences and, you know
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 The hedges
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: The hedges and things like that
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 As they want you to do and
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Where the big farm is more likely to erm, let two fields run into one, because, because the number of cows you know its, its er.....
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Was there anything last year when things were very difficult for you and distressing that really helped can you think of anything?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well, after we lost our stock we got over a hundred letters sent from friends and neighbours and colleagues and we even had letters and cards and things from people that we didn\rquote 
t even know. And I felt that that was a big comfort to everyone, in turn I must admit I was writing my fair share to, to people also but er, it was, it was comforting to know that other people cared.  I
 think really, but er, this was all from your friends, your neighbours, your relations and members of the farming community.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 A lot of people have said they spent more time on the phone than usual did that happen?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Oh certainly happened here, when you weren\rquote 
t travelling anywhere the petrol bills were down, but I would have to say the telephone bills were up because you had to keep in touch with people also.  Either for to see how they were getting on and how it was affecting them or checking on own health o
r sympathising with them, so, I think the telephone was a lifeline to everyone in the farming community at that time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 And what about things like the radio, internet, television did you, did you use that for information or was it word of mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well we got a lot of our information from the radio and particularly Radio Cumbria seemed to serve us well, just where we\rquote re situated here we get bad television reception
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par  Even though the television mast is just a short distance from here the signals go, sort of over the top of us. So we tune to BBC Scotland so that we can get a good picture but unfortunately such as Ceefax all we get there is BBC Scotland so we knew all a
bout the outbreaks over the border but we weren\rquote t getting the local information,  so yes I would have to say it was Radio Cumbria that kept us up to date with what was happening there. And at that stage didn\rquote 
t er have the internet or anything so it was Radio Cumbria where we got all our information from really wasn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Yeah, um, cos they give a bulletin every hour I think in the morning and at five to eight
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That\rquote s right, we even had to have the radio plugged up outside, if you were still  milking so you know we didn\rquote t miss them, because often when you got in it was mebbe five past the hour and then it was a long wait \lquote 
til the next one like really, so yes, we er, we got a lot of our information from them wasn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Is there anything else that you can think of that was really important to you that we haven\rquote t talked about?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I think everybody just missed the social aspect of seeing people 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 And meeting up at, well say the auction mart or, various functions throughout the year. The Young Farmers all had 
a difficult time as well, all their functions were cancelled.  In fact sort of everything that we went to was cancelled for the year and, you just missed out er seeing everybody like really, and catching up for a good crack}{\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 
\chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn }{\insrsid15542048  chat}}}{
\insrsid15542048 , it was only the telephone that er, sort of replaced those type of events like really eh.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Would you have gone to shows and things...... did you go to..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 We used to go to shows and things yes, we did, so, you know everything like that was just cancelled really wasn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: (Inaudible 320) it was sort of nine or ten months before we saw my parents, we had er, an auntie over from Australia and we had er a farewell party for her at the end of January,
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Just before she left to go back, didn\rquote t we
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And erm, I think it was September 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Before we actually saw them again
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Before we went back to Bothel again, to my father\rquote s home
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 How far\rquote s that is it about eight\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 It\rquote s about four miles from here like isn\rquote t it? Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Only four?
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: If that, yeah
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par Yeah, my sister they\rquote re still farming, we saw them in January and then the next time we actually saw them was in November when it was their Silver Wedding, but obviously spoken on the \lquote phone plenty times, but er, we didn\rquote 
t actually see people like, did we, at all
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: No
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Particularly those that were farming you see like eh
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: See even after we went down you didn\rquote t want to, you didn\rquote t want them to come here or you go there for the fear of 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Spread or
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Passing it on to them
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Did you miss out on important things like weddings and funerals?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Erm, well I don\rquote t really think we had so many weddings or things to go to but, erm a lot of people that we knew that were going to get married actually cancelled it for a year 
\par 
\par Really?
\par 
\par and, postponed it, but things like twenty first birthdays and that, you cannot replace them by holding it back for a year, that date is gone like really, isn\rquote t it but
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Other than weddings and funerals we didn\rquote t miss out on anything because everything else was cancelled anyhow
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Thats right
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: You know, everything in the farming 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Calendar was cancelled, wasn\rquote t  it?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: It was cancelled so we didn\rquote t miss out on anything other than, had the,  but I don\rquote t , I think, we, we did go to a funeral actually but they had they had mats  down at the\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 That\rquote s right, it was even difficult for those type of events that you\rquote ve no control over like eh
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I think we had, had we gone down at that stage or not? Arthur..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 No, that was in March.It was in the beginning of March that, but there was outbreaks in Cumbria then and, personally I would\rquote ve thought there would\rquote 
ve been more people at, at his funeral had it not been for the foot and mouth situation, some people would be reluctant to travel even to that. So you know, things like funerals you have no control over when they\rquote 
re going to happen so, so, its been difficult for everybody through the walks of life really
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: There\rquote s actually there\rquote s a one we would\rquote ve gone to and they, they made it a private erm funeral so that nobody
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Felt as though they were
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Had to go
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: You know sort of spares you the,
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Thinking
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par H:  should I go?
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Or should I not?  The decision\rquote s made for you like really isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: That was a farming\'85
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Yes, yes you wouldn\rquote t feel you were offending anyone
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 You weren\rquote t that\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: And that was a farming family that er
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Lost their daughter wasn\rquote t it yeah
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Lost their daughter, they made that decision to, to make it private for that, I think, well for that reason really
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I\rquote m sure it was that reason, that\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 \lquote Cos usually farming funeral\rquote s they\rquote re big aren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 They are, they are 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 Everybody goes
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par Certainly they do, that\rquote s right.
\par (pause)
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 So are things getting back to normal socially, have you events planned again?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I think they\rquote ll be getting back, a bit more back to normal this year like really, clubs are just sort of beginning to meet, I\rquote 
d have said since the New Year really, but you know clubs are beginning to make some progress and begin thinking you know for the future
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well the new season sort of starts September, through into the winter months and, yeah I would think erm they\rquote ve all sort of held meetings from then onwards sort of thing, but I wouldn\rquote t know that the enthusiasm
\rquote s the same as it was.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Why is that, do you think there\rquote s still a hang over or is it people are nervous about it coming back?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: I don\rquote t know that peoples nervous about it coming again, well some might say has it ever gone away really, cos I was er, I went for some er, spare parts down to Aspatria today and the man told us today that there\rquote 
s, he heard that there\rquote s been over twenty five thousand been slaughtered out since its supposed to have stopped, . That you just never hear about, I mean we did hear that there\rquote d been two thousand slaughtered on New Year\rquote 
s Eve, and we do know of other cases, apart from that one you know, but er, its just the absurdity and the worry about it, but I think peoples just er, accepted that its gone and er, you know making the most of it, everybodys trying to restock and,
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Kind of get life back to normal like
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Make a go of it eh?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Do you think things\rquote ll get back to normal ?(inaudible 380)
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 I think they\rquote ll get back to normal but perhaps not just the same as they were. I think they\rquote re going to be, well such as the auction mart, they\rquote 
re going to be subject to a lot more regulations and cleansing and disinfecting of what have you, but erm I don\rquote t know whether life\rquote ll just ever be as it was previously.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Its nearly a year isn\rquote t since auction marts closed?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 It is, thats right, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Is there any sign of them opening, would you think your job\rquote ll come back again?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Er yes I think it will, er they are hoping for the end of February but at the moment they\rquote re waiting for DEFRA to tell them, well, all the time times going on, and you know, if there\rquote 
s more regulations made then they have to have the opportunity to tell the general public about what\rquote s going to happen and what have you, but, erm.  I think it\rquote ll be no easier than it was and we won\rquote 
t have the numbers of stock in this area for quite a time. So, it will take a long time to get back anything near normality that, was there this time last year. But, you know there\rquote 
s such a lot of paperwork with cattle now, staff will certainly be needed to check all the passports and documents and what have you. But, I don\rquote t think it\rquote 
ll just be the same as it used to be. Whereas, you used to watch all these lorries and, Land Rovers and trailers bringing their cattle in, just when they had time and when they could fit it in, but, I think days like that\rquote ll be gone now, really.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Has lambing started around here, have you got any lambs round here?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 Well er, we haven\rquote t really but you see there\rquote s not very many sheep in this area either because, last year a l
ot of people gave up their sheep on the voluntary cull, in the hope it would save their cattle. So, people have begun to get a few sheep back but, because of the difficulties there was in the autumn for getting tups}{\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn 
{\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15542048 \chftn }{\insrsid15542048  rams}}}{\insrsid15542048 
 to the ewes 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Yeah
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par I think lambing, er, it\rquote ll not be \lquote til April I would\rquote ve thought, but..
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Well, its, its usually March April round, in this area anyhow
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J:Right
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 But I think it\rquote ll perhaps be a little bit later this year won\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: Anybody, that got erm, female sheep back couldn\rquote t really get a tup to go with them, you could get tups or you could get the yows, but er you
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 It was difficult er, to get both at once, like eh, so
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Mm
\par }{\insrsid15542048 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048 H: But yes, er I think that er, we have one, a couple of neighbours that\rquote s, I think they\rquote re due later this month, mebbe into March, so that you know  went out on the cull and they\rquote ve got replacements back
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15542048 J: Just wondered whether that might make things feel different
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15542048 More normal again, that\rquote s right, uh huh, but there\rquote s certainly greener fields round this area because people haven\rquote t the numbers of sheep that they, they normally have, whereas those that still have them haven
\rquote t got their numbers have they
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid15542048  H: No}{\insrsid15542048 
\par 
\par So, whereas often the fields are looking very brown at this time of year after frost and what have you but, they are quite green at the moment, anyway eh?
\par }}