{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 Body Text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid3358702 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1663319\rsid3095410\rsid3358702\rsid9907541\rsid10361768}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy11\hr14\min39}{\version4}{\edmins3}{\nofpages7}{\nofwords2881}{\nofchars16427}{\*\company Information Systems Services}{\nofcharsws19270}
{\vern16391}}\paperw11909\paperh16834 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot3358702 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid1663319 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1663319 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1663319 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1663319 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linex0\headery706\footery706\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\fs20\insrsid1663319 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid3358702 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid1663319 
\par Diary ID:       PM24}{\insrsid1663319 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid1663319 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs20\insrsid3358702 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid10361768 7}}}{\cs20\insrsid3358702 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid3358702 {\insrsid3358702 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid1663319 
\par Information about diarist
\par }{\insrsid1663319 Date of birth: 1959
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 4}{\cs18\super\insrsid1663319 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs18\fs20\super\insrsid1663319 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid1663319  }{
\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 Group 1 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 Group 2 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 Group 3 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 Group 5 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid1663319 Group 6 }{\fs20\insrsid1663319 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid1663319 
\par }}}{\insrsid1663319 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1663319 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1663319 
\par 
\par Diary 1
\par Mixed emotions this week as it was first anniversary of the foot and mouth outbreak at Heddon-on-the-wall in Northumberland. There was a great deal of coverage in the local media and 
also the anniversary was marked in the National Media. Naturally this brought the memories flooding back. Never want to witness it again. To my mind it has been a year of unparalleled suffering in Cumbria\rquote 
s farming community but also of unparalleled resilience and courage. Unfortunately the failure to gain early control of the epidemic forced the countryside to close down with a complete loss of public confidence.
\par 
\par In Cumbria, my county there has been a severe downturn in rural business, which has left the rural economy and people\rquote 
s livelihoods in turmoil, I fear that the worst effect on rural employment is still to come. However, there were some brighter notes this week with Harrison and Hetherington\rquote s auction mart opening on Monday 18}{\super\insrsid1663319 th}{
\insrsid1663319  February. This was the first \lquote live\rquote  livestock auction in Cumbria since the outbreak of the disease last year.
\par 
\par Glad to hear that work is re-commencing on the A66 Stainburn to Clifton by-pass near Workington. Work was postponed during the foot and mouth outbreak. It was always an accident black spot when I worked for Cumbria Police.
\par 
\par Spoke to a couple of team mates who are local farmers at the rugby club and pleased to hear their restocking is going alright. Apparently Cumbria is currently experiencing the largest restocking programme the world has ever seen.
\par 
\par A survey published this week shows that 78% of culled out farmers aim to restock with only 6% indicating they want to move out o
f farming. From my experience of the farmers I met during and after the outbreak the percentage of those restocking in Cumbria will be higher than this national survey. On a positive note for the Environment Agency 25% indicated that they would \lquote 
definitely or possibly\rquote  move some or all of their land into environmental schemes.
\par 
\par Pleased to hear that farmers caught up in the 3 km firebreak cull in Cumbria at the height of the crisis will not get the chance to appeal against valuations of their animals. They w
ere not given any option at the time and should have the right to fair arbitration, many smaller sheep farmers in Cumbria suffered hardship.
\par 
\par County lost a great servant to rugby and I lost a friend}{\insrsid10361768 ,}{\insrsid1663319  }{\insrsid10361768 [who] }{\insrsid1663319 aged 44 lost his battle with cancer. He nev
er complained despite intense pain and got on with things. He left a wife and three daughters. He will be sadly missed by all involved in rugby in Cumbria. It tends to put everything in perspective when something like this happens, makes your own worries 
about work immaterial.
\par 
\par Weather awful at the weekend, approx 8 inches of snow in Penrith. Rugby cancelled on Saturday and Sunday. Thoughts of the disruption to local sport caused by foot and mouth.
\par 
\par Diary 2
\par Another hectic week at work started with a meeting
 of the area hydrometric improvements group. I have been project leader in North Area since April 1999. It has been extremely difficult and taxing to keep the project on track following my secondment to North East region in November 2000. I had just retur
ned to the Penrith office when the foot and mouth crisis developed and then got seconded to DEFRA.
\par 
\par I was absent from my day job for 6 months so it has been an uphill struggle and quite stressful getting the programme up and running again. Thankfully we now
 have access to all sites and I have had wonderful support from area hydrometry. Staff travelling up from Warrington commented that it was good to see sheep and cattle in the fields again. I could only endorse that sentiment.
\par 
\par Interview with I}{\insrsid10361768 . }{\insrsid1663319 one to one
 on Monday evening, I was dreading talking into the tape recorder but was surprised at how quickly the memories and feelings came flooding back. Maybe I opened up too much as I am not good at showing my feelings. However, I believe that this project is im
portant and our stories need to be told. Did not sleep very well that evening.
\par 
\par Busy with flood events on Tuesday and Wednesday. Rivers high on Tuesday and high tides Wednesday morning and evening which was an early morning call out. Still a great deal on l
ocal border TV and the local press with it being the anniversary of foot and mouth outbreak in Cumbria. Also a number of reports were issued including a report of the environmental impact of foot and mouth disease from the agency.
\par 
\par The report published on Wednesday 27}{\super\insrsid1663319 th}{\insrsid1663319 
 February says that in general the environmental impact of the outbreak in England and Wales has been short-term and localised. However, it goes on to say the agency cannot be sure there will be no long-term impact on groundwater from the bur
ial of carcasses and pyre ash. 
\par 
\par I have decided to include a copy with my diary as I would like to think that the agency has been more open with the public with regard to our work during the foot and mouth crisis. I was somewhat disappointed more reference
 was not made to contingency planning and multi-agency co-operation should the nightmare ever return. It was good to read the agency are pressing that the minimising of waste created must be central to future contingency planning, together with plans for 
maximising the use of properly licensed and regulated disposal facilities such as rendering, incineration and licensed land filling.
\par 
\par The report into the handling of the foot and mouth crisis in Northumberland was also issued on Tuesday and has concluded th
at more animals were slaughtered in the county than was necessary to control the outbreak. The inquiry initiated by Northumberland County Council concluded that there was no effective system of overall crisis management until a disease emergency control c
entre was set up five weeks after the first case was confirmed. The report was extremely critical of MAFF/DERFA.
\par 
\par With Cumbria County Council  also announcing that it is to hold it\rquote s own inquiry into the handling of the crisis, I only hope it\rquote 
s findings will be taken seriously. Cumbrian farmers still have serious concerns over the Governments lessons learned inquiry.
\par 
\par Personally I would have welcomed a full public inquiry at least to make sure contingency planning would be in place to combat su
ch things as foot and mouth disease, which was a major incident for the nation, with widespread economic and social implications.
\par 
\par Members of the Government initiated enquiries looking at lessons learnt from the epidemic are also visiting Cumbria. A group 
of MEPs will visit Cumbria also to take evidence from those affected by the foot and mouth epidemic. Maybe there is going to be so may inquires that the issues will become clouded and not acted upon. I am concerned we are throwing good money after bad.

\par 
\par Th
ere were also a few scares this week. I learnt last week a single sheep was slaughtered after tests showed that it had antibodies to the foot and mouth virus. Fortunately the sheep from the Kirkby Stephen area produced blood samples that tested negative f
or the foot and mouth virus.
\par 
\par With the further scare in North Yorkshire which had widespread coverage in the national media, it has been a week of concern to farmers throughout the county many who are in the process of restocking. Can\rquote t imagine the stress i
t caused. Fortunately the results from North Yorkshire were also negative but I know the fear remains, certainly made me jumpy.
\par 
\par Thankfully a couple of minor flood events plus spending a weekend with my children in Nottingham and Lincolnshire kept me fully
 occupied. Certainly the high of spending quality time with my children helps take your mind of such things. The strength among Cumbria\rquote s farming families was also something which held communities together during the crisis.
\par 
\par From Thursday to Sunday was good, as during last year the occasional break does a lot of good. 
\par 
\par I wrote too much this week but such a lot happened and foot and mouth and it\rquote s after effects still have widespread coverage in the local media you cannot get away from it. 
\par 
\par However, }{\insrsid10361768 [friend]}{\insrsid1663319 \rquote 
s funeral on Wednesday was attended by over 900 people puts everything in perspective. He was only a year older than myself. He had battled against cancer for the last eighteen months. He was a fighter, he never complained, didn\rquote 
t want pity, he will be a great loss to Penrith Grammar School, the community and rugby. We had other great losses as well as Foot and Mouth. Peter was only 44 years old and an inspiration to everyone who knew or played sport with him.
\par 
\par Diary 3
\par A much better week at work, things are
 picking up. Feeling much more positive about my own job and role. For a long time after returning to my day job after foot and mouth I had problems in my own mind about justifying my job as a flood warning officer in the light of what I had experienced.

\par 
\par Spoke to a number of farmers on the lower Eden floodplain about the flood warnings we provide. Pleased to hear how supportive they were for the job we are doing. I was also glad to hear they are all re-stocking and how positive they sounded. Certainly giv
es you a lift after you remember all that they have gone through over the last year. 
\par 
\par On Wednesday travelled from the office to Mosedale House in Blencathra as part of an article on flood warning the Cumberland and Westmorland Herald were running. Fred the
 Herald cameraman had also witnessed the crisis at first hand and knows a lot of the local farming community. Both commented that it was good to see sheep back in the fields and even the first lambs were appearing again. The last lambs I saw last year wer
e being given lethal injections by a vet and we laid them out in rows to spray with disinfectant till they were taken for disposal.
\par 
\par It does not seem only a year ago since all these awful scenes were taking place throughout Cumbria and it is not far from people\rquote 
s minds. Even on a sports and social visit to Jennings Brewery on Thursday evening the tour guide brought up the subject of foot and mouth. With stock in the area being culled during the crisis and some local farms just being restocked, the brewery ha
d problems disposing of waste grain mash, which had previously gone to local farms.
\par 
\par News in local media somewhat more up-beat with Lowther horse trials to take place again this summer. Kirkby Stephen auction mart also opened for the first time on Monday.
\par 
\par Also in the news this week the bloke accused of the bolt gun murder at Great Orton during the foot and mouth crisis was acquitted. I remember it being a big talking point at the time. There was certainly the feeling among local people that many people wer
e coming into the country just to make money, however, there was no resentment towards the Army or foreign vets.
\par 
\par Played rugby at the weekend, talked with Geoff who farms at Brougham near Penrith. Very pleased to hear his restocking is going well. Certainly there is a lot more stock in the fields again. Seems that the majority of farmers are restocking though 
my work colleague}{\insrsid10361768 \rquote s}{\insrsid1663319  parents}{\insrsid10361768 \rquote }{\insrsid1663319  farm, and say that there is an up surge in farm sales.
\par 
\par  
\par 
\par 
\par Diary 4
\par A very hectic week with only four working days fol
lowed by a weekend in Amsterdam. High spirits and good morale at work with a number of us looking forward to our trip and working out an itinary. Certainly different from last year when everything was doom, gloom and dispondency in the office as foot and 
mouth took hold of Cumbria.
\par 
\par A lot of us have links with the farming community in the county and especially the Penrith area, and it was a black time last year with cases in Cumbria rising from 40 to 90 and then rocketiing into the hundreds. I remember it c
ausing tremendous anxiety with rumours abounding. My parents were in South Africa at the time as I prepared to go and work for DEFRA as a gatekeeper.
\par 
\par Tremendous amount of local media coverage of what many people referred to as \lquote Black Thursday\rquote , I think it was March 15}{\super\insrsid1663319 th}{\insrsid1663319 
 2001 when things really developed into a full blown crisis in Cumbria and to be honest panic set in. At that time things appeared to be getting out of control. On Tuesday night there was a big piece on Border TV with all the graphic picture
s of the outbreak last year. For some reason I could not watch it and went rugby training to get away from this black anniversary. Running around hitting tackle bags certainly takes your mind off things.
\par 
\par I think it was a good time to have a break this wee
k and get away to a totally different environemnt, i.e. Amsterdam but even on the trip up to Glasgow Airport Andy and Sarah commented on how good it was to see all the stock back in the fields in North Cumbria and the Scottish Borders.
\par 
\par We drove past the H
espin Wood Landfill site on the A74 where I worked for a time on the mass burial of carcasses at the site. It may be just the smell of waste but there still seems to be a smell of death about the place which even permiated the car as it passed by.
\par 
\par May be 
just a coincidence but I wondered why we decided to go to Holland as last year they also had a foot and mouth outbreak over there. However, their experience seems to have been quite different as they vaccinated and then culled. It seems that they acted qu
ickly and decisively isolating the outbreak before it had a chance to spread. A complete contrast to the UK. Perhaps we should learn lessons from the way the Dutch dealt with the situation.
\par 
\par First time I had been abroad for three years since taking up my po
st with the Environment Agency. Amsterdam a bit of a culture shock at first but quickly felt relaxed and really enjoyed the change of environment. Did the usual tourist things with a boat trip round the canals taking in all the sites. Experienced an equal
 share of culture and sub-culture. The highlight of the trip for me was the Van Gogh exhibition with all 3 sunflower paintings being shown together. I was amazed at the life and vibrant colours in Van Gogh\rquote 
s works from Provence,  there was a picture a grass
 blowing in the wind and the texture was so amazing it was if you could feel the wind blowing. It was simply fantastic to see those paintings at first hadn aas the texture and vibrancy of the colour is just not the same as looking at them in the flat page
s of a book. Many of the paintings were of simple rural scenes and landscapes but had such life in them.
\par 
\par Even though I was completely shattered after such a hectic trip I am certainly of the opinion that the break was something I badly needed. I think gett
ing away on a foreign holiday after the foot and mouth crisis abated in Cumbria may have been beneficial rather than pitching myself back into my normal day job immediately as I felt I had to catch up on six months lost work which caused much stress and a
n
xiety and made me question for a long time whether my job as a Flood Warning Officer was worthwhile. I certainly think if my children had been a lot older and going their own way I would have been looking for aid work in the third world. On one hand I hat
ed all the misery and destruction caused by foot and mouth but I enjoyed being at the sharp end dealing directly with people who looked to me for assistance and support.
\par 
\par Diary 5
\par Tired at the start of this week following a hectic weekend in Amsterdam.  Really should have taken Monday off but must try and keep on top of my current workload. Pressure on to complete a multi-agency response plan to flooding in Cumbria.
\par 
\par I remember this week last year everything was just dropped as a dozen of us were seconded to DEFRA were given a quick briefing before finding ourselves pitched into the Foot and Mouth outbreak which was now out of control in Cumbria.
\par 
\par Somedays I think I am still trying to catch up on the work as a result of everything being dropped to respond
 to the outbreak. At least I am not working the long hours we had to last year. It is funny how these thoughts come back to you. However, it is very difficult living in Cumbria getting away from it. The local press still include articles and as I tend to 
read the Cumberland News and the Cumberland and Westmorland Herald there are always constant reminders of last years events. Looking forward very much to spending a week with my children during the Easter school holidays.
\par 
\par I remember last year I did not kno
w whether I would be able to spend any time with the children as I was out on the farms. Thankfully Easter was late in mid-April and I was still allowed some time off to see them. It meant coming off the farms and getting clean before I could go for them 
and we went to Blackpool just to get away from Cumbria as it was not a pleasant place to take the children back for a holiday. Thankfully this year we will be able to get out walking.
\par 
\par Certainly that break last year kept me sane and took me away albeit for a short time from Cumbria\rquote s killing fields. Unfortunately the farmers could not get off the farms for a break.
\par 
\par Before I was allowed to travel to Nottingham last year I had to have a two day quarantine and completely disinfect my car. I did not tell the ch
ildren too much about what I was doing but even they knew that things were bad in Cumbria from watching the news and speaking to their grandparents on the phone. This year on the way back from Nottingham we travelled back through the Yorkshire Dales inclu
ding Skipton and Settle. It was good to see all the stock in the fields as well as all the tourists. A complete contrast from last year when I avoided rural routes and travelled via the motorway system up to Blackpool.
\par 
\par It was a good week at work though it always seems better when there is something to look forward to and there was plenty of banter about our trip to Amsterdam with the photos being passed round.
\par 
\par Diary 6
\par Holidays with my children are the highlight of the year. Since the break up of my marriage four years ago I have missed daily contact with my children terribly. I have never got used to being away from them and can only hope that when my ex-wife\rquote 
s partner\rquote s current contract in Nottingham ends this year they will move north again.
\par 
\par I was very thankful that during the foot and mouth crisis that my manager realised how important the contact I had with my children was, I will always be grateful to him for realising how important it was to me.
\par 
\par This time last year I took them to Blackpool to get awa
y from the pyres and all the mayhem going on in Cumbria. I knew I needed to get away for a while for my own sanity. It was great this year to get out walking again in the Lake District and see all the new lambs playing in the fields. When the weather is g
ood Cumbria takes some beating.
\par 
\par This year I could fully concentrate on making sure the children had a good time. Last year I just kept thinking about how things were going back in Cumbria. I even felt guilty about running away to Blackpool for a few days a
nd not supporting the local tourist industry, which was in a dire state.
\par 
\par My thinking was I do not ever want to see the sights I had seen in the fields of Cumbria again in my lifetime and I certainly did not want my children to see them. This year we certa
inly did our bit for the local tourist industry and economy staying in the county the whole week and it was certainly good to see the visitors flocking back again to the county.
\par 
\par 
\par }}