{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{
\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}{\*\cs21 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid7634277 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid4488825\rsid7634277\rsid9006048\rsid10491888}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr13\min11}{\version4}{\edmins3}{\nofpages23}{\nofwords4994}{\nofchars28471}{\nofcharsws33399}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot7634277 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid9006048 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid7634277 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid9006048 
\par Interview ID:  PM55}{\insrsid9006048 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9006048 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs21\insrsid7634277 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs21\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid10491888 23}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs21\insrsid7634277 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid7634277 {\insrsid7634277 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 27}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}27/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid9006048 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Date of birth: 1960
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9006048 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs20\super\insrsid9006048 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid9006048 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid9006048  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9006048 
\par }}}{\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9006048 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Can you tell me a bit about events of last year, how it affected you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well, to start with I first heard of foot and mouth obviously through the media like most people did.  So I couldn\rquote t believe it was happening really.  It came as a shock.  I had never heard of foot and mouth before so I didn
\rquote t understand what it was about.
  Even when people explain about it you are still not sure how it gets there and what the best way of controlling it is.  When it actually hit our area and local farms, people you knew, actually had foot and mouth you were sort of numb, numb with shock, r
e
ally.  Hearing about them, people that you knew and their livelihood gone.  Obviously, us local people here having had no immediate connection with farming, we felt for the farmers.  But you felt helpless, nothing you could do, nothing to say or anything 
really and it just all seemed to be happening and getting closer and it was odd how some farms got it and others didn\rquote 
t, especially neighbouring farms.  You would have one farm down the road they were one of the early ones to get it and then less than half a mile, maybe a quarter of mile away from them, another farm and they didn\rquote 
t get it.  It just seemed very odd to think, especially in the stories which were going about being carried in the wind and carried by birds and that sort of thing.  You thought tha
t is it they are all going to end up with it.  When the ones in the village when they all one after another went with it, it was strange. 
\par 
\par The worst thing about that, for us living here, was just not being able to use the road.  They basically closed the 
road on the day when they moved, obviously they took away the dead animals.  It just seemed to go on for a long time where roads were here, there and everywhere closed.  You just didn\rquote 
t know which road to go down.  You think I want to go to Carlisle now wh
ich road is closed at the moment.  Then I think there was one time when there was no choice, there was one road to take and you had to work which way to go and obviously going the long round took longer, obviously more fuel.  It was very frustrating at th
e time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 They are very narrow roads.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, they are very narrow roads, especially with all these vehicles, these big lorries and tankers and things.  The tankers are still going at the moment and I met one just today on the way back from Carlisle.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What are they doing now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 They must be taking away the stuff, the leachate.  Somebody said it was about two tankers a week taking them away now.  I get the feeling it might be a bit more.  There seems to be a few tankers about.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Is there?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Unless there have been doing other things.  It is all very secretive you don\rquote t know what is going on.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 It must be strange having that in your back yard.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, it is.  It was very strange.  I mean you have got used to it now.  When it first started you know\'85. and that first day wh
en I saw it on the news that they were actually going to bury them up there. I though what, what are they talking about.  I just thought it must be something they are thinking about doing not actually going to do it.  Then they did.  To start with obvious
ly we had to think about the farmers and so we felt sorry for them and obviously there was no choice.   Nobody did anything or said anything.   
\par 
\par Then once they were talking about bringing animals from other areas that really got to all of us locals.  They 
were busy making banners and they were going to have a protest, we were going to get annoyed about it.  It was a cause of frustration for a while.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 When did it all start?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 When did it start?  They announced it on the news on Mothering Sunday.  I forgot the date that was, sometime in March.  That was when they had the first announcement on the news.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 How did events go after that \'85.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 No, it started happening, slowly to start w
ith and then it sort of got busier and busier and then there was the news about that slaughterman being shot as well which is it a bit close to home but you wondered what was going on.  They didn\rquote 
t actually say how it had happened, they obviously wouldn\rquote t know.  But coming on the news that somebody had been shot, it is a worry.  You think what is going on.  You don\rquote 
t know whether it was an accident or whether it was on purpose or how it came about or anything.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Has that story been clarified?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I don\rquote t actually think it has been in court yet.  It could take some time to get started.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So when did it start causing you problems?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 The very first time I saw it on the news, I though well you know that is a bit close to home and we did we really want all these sheep buried on our doorstep.  But somebody has to, I suppose.  We didn\rquote 
t have much choice, there was nothing we could do.  There was no point in saying, to start with as I say we didn\rquote t do anything or say anything, we just though it is going to happen, we can\rquote t do anything.  It wasn\rquote 
t until when they thought they had enough animals in there that they were going to close it and then they said no they were going to bury more animals and they were coming from other areas and that.  We weren\rquote t in agreement of them c
oming from other areas.  What we said was we don\rquote t mind local animals, obviously Cumbrian animals being buried.  Why can\rquote 
t Yorkshire folk bury their own animals.  Get a spade out over there.  It seemed ridiculous, transportation and everything else and spr
eading the disease, spreading it, driving the lorries about and everything it just seemed wrong really, silly, coals to Newcastle, that kind of thing.
\par 
\par  }{\b\insrsid9006048 Do you know how many animals were buried?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Oh gosh, I can\rquote t remember the number now but there was a heck of a lot.  How many million was it \endash  a lot?  I can\rquote t off hand \'85
 I can probably find out I have a piece of paper somewhere it was in the news.  I kept hold of that \endash  this picture showing the ariel views.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So what was day to day life like when the site was in full operation?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 You weren't really sure, obviously you watched the news every time the news was on to make sure you missed nothing and you listened and watched to see what the situation was as far as farmers in our area, in Cumbria.  You watched it an
d people\rquote s names you recognised that you knew and you just felt gutted and things like well obviously they weren\rquote 
t very useful, helpful I should say, about telling you about road closures or anything like this.  You had to find out too late about things li
ke that when you drive down the road and see a no entry sign.  But the fact the countryside was closed meant you weren\rquote t sure whether you were meant to go anywhere or stay at home or what to do.  
\par 
\par Then the smells out there and that.  You came into the house it was just outside it didn\rquote t come in the house.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What was it like?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I just couldn\rquote t describe the smell that I had had never smelled before, really, really disgusting, horrible. And then the smell of the pyres as well, you couldn\rquote 
t really go for a walk.  I did try sometimes to go for walk but the smell got right in your throat and the smoke, it was really awful.  I felt very low, very ... well I was depressed really - you could call it that with the whole situation.  It just felt 
like it was going to go on forever.  When it first started you thought oh well a few weeks and it will be over.  You just couldn\rquote 
t conceive it was going to go on for as long as it did really.  In fact today it was on the news today about Thirsk there was a couple of animals there that they thought \'85
  that they are now at the stage of putting down rather then waiting to see if they have \endash  you know, they are playing on the safe side really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I think they are supposed to be negative\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, no, they say it is going to take three or four days.  There is nothing you can do to help, nothing you can really do or say to anyone.  I think one of the worst times was \endash 
 well obviously I have been past fields full of dead animals, cows lying about and sheep.   There was a f
ield full of sheep that were there it must have been at least ten days.  The same sheep that lay there, had been killed and not taken away and I just thought that was unbelievable that they just didn\rquote 
t seem to be in control of it in that way.  You would think once they had killed them they would get rid of them as quick as they could, wouldn\rquote 
t you.  Because obviously well there was sheep in this field and in the next field there were live sheep.  It seemed a bit strange really, just weird.  But they weren\rquote t there for long by the next week.  
\par 
\par It is good now to see the sheep back in fields again.  You do look twice when you see sheep in a field now.  Once upon a time they would just be there and you wouldn\rquote t really notice and now you sort of look twice and ooh sheep in that field.  

\par 
\par There was the time when I phoned up a friend who her husband, they have got a big dairy farm.  They had actually just had their animals culled that day when I phoned and to hear a grown man cry that is very awful.  He was trying h
ard not to but he was telling us really it had really got to him.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Your day-to-day life must have been disrupted\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, it was really.  We weren\rquote t sure where, as I say, we felt we couldn\rquote t go anywhere, we certainly couldn\rquote t have a social life.  Well the 
social life I was used to because most of my friends, I belong to this country ?? and most of them are in the farming business so they weren\rquote t able to do anything.  
\par 
\par I know one person barricaded himself in more and less and he stayed on his farm the whole time, he wouldn\rquote t go anywhere.  He didn\rquote t go out at all.  Maybe that was the answer I don\rquote t know but he was one of the lucky ones who didn
\rquote t loose his animals, that was for months and months and months he never went anywhere.  But it was pretty bad.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 How long was it bad for you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 How long?  Right through from the beginning, right through till the end of the summer really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So from March, April to about August?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, probably about then.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So six, seven months?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes.  I actually I got this virus which I don\rquote t know whether it is connected or it isn\rquote t but from the end of August right through till the December I had this thing that just wouldn\rquote 
t go away.  I went to the doctor all he could say was it was a virus, a viral infection.  He couldn\rquote t prescribe anything, he just said time it was just going to get better.  I don\rquote 
t know, it might not be anything to do with it, but it just makes you wonder a bit, doesn\rquote t it because it went on and on.  I had no energy and I just felt really tired all the time and not really right at all, not well, headaches and all sorts.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 That is my next question, how do you think the whole thing affected your health?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well, as I say, I don\rquote t if that, you will never know if that had anything to do with that but it lasted from the end of August right through to December.  There is no way you can say for definite there was any connection.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 You said you were quite down as well?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, I was.  Well, it was bound to get you down wasn\rquote t it, but I think it got everybody down.  Everybody was sort of distressed by it all.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What about the way they managed the site?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well they were just sort of up there a stone throw away.  Apart from the noise and smell and whatever we didn\rquote t have a clue apart from what we saw on the TV about them taking all the animals in, and that.  We weren\rquote 
t kept informed of anything that was one of the things, it is easy to say that now, at the time it was an emergency wasn\rquote t it but we felt that we weren\rquote t kept aware of things that were going on.  I suppose it would have been too muc
h for them to let us know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Did you have confidence in what they were doing with..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, I think so.  I suppose I thought the animals had to go somewhere and if it was a site that .. it hadn\rquote t been used, you know it had been used for micro-lights and the s
hooting club used to go there and that sort of thing so it wasn\rquote t that well used.
\par 
\par I think my thoughts were that they didn\rquote t bring the army in soon enough.  Because as I say with these animals lying about they didn\rquote t seem to be in control of the organisati
on, and keeping on the ball things they seemed to be getting behind with that.  My thoughts were that they hadn\rquote t got the army in soon enough.
\par 
\par I saw someone who actually worked for what was then known as MAFF at the time and I said to her do you think the
y should have brought the army in earlier, do you agree with that?  She surprised me by saying no, actually I think the army is spreading the disease.  I said how do you think that.  She said well I don\rquote 
t think that they just want to come in do the job and go away and they are in so much of a hurry that she didn\rquote t think that they were disinfecting their vehicles properly.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Really?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, that is somebody saying that.  Interesting, isn\rquote t it, but you hear all sorts of stories, don\rquote t you?  
\par 
\par I think one of gruesomest stories is from one of these farmers he said they were loading his wagon, it was half 5/6 o\rquote 
clock at night and they have been at it all day basically and they had got this wagon loaded and they were trying to put the cover on.  Th
ere was 5 legs of these animals sticking out of the top and they were talking about starting to get it out and starting again and he more or less said, 
\par \'93don\rquote t worry I will sort it I have got a chainsaw.\'94  So pretty insensitive but that is his story of foot and mouth.  But he seems to be that sort of person that doesn\rquote 
t seem to be that bothered. Obviously not as attached to his animals as a lot of farmers seem to be.  There are an awful lot of farmers that you can tell that they are attached to their animals.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I guess some people just can\rquote 
t understand the relationship that farmers have with their animals.  They think that the animals are going to be killed anyway - that is the whole point - so why get upset about foot and mouth, what do you think about that? 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well, I have not thought about it really.  Good point.  It is just totally awful, it is wiping the whole lot out all at once.  It is not like where they take half a dozen sheep to the market one week, that sort of thing.  
\par 
\par Although I am a farmer\rquote s daughter I am not really sort of hooked on   farming as I maybe should be because I never went into it myself.  None of my brothers was interested in it.  I have 3 brothers and none of them were interested so ... I don
\rquote t even think my Dad was that interested.  If he told the truth he would rather do something else.   It was in the days when you didn\rquote t have choice.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 That is really interesting\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Certainly town people you can imagine that the town people because a lot of the town people weren\rquote t really that bothered it is not happening in our area.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Do you think that is the case? 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, I think they just thought it is nothing to do with us.  They must have done, mustn\rquote t they?  I don\rquote t agree with what was said at the meeting the other night.  Someone said well what
 about what is happening in the cities.  I think I don\rquote t think it is fair to say that we aren\rquote t bothered about that because we are but in a different way.  I mean we obviously can\rquote 
t do anything about that but we are concerned though.   I think there is a difference.  I think we are concerned about issues like that but whereas the town people just didn\rquote 
t seem to think it was anything to do with them so they just pretend it isn\rquote t happening.  This week we are aware of what is going on in cities, vandalism and everything else.  Do you understand what I mean by that?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Because the country people that came to the meeting cared about each other cared about what is going on everywhere really.  They don\rquote t think ooh it is nothing to do with us.  I think people wh
o live in towns have different outlook to us because it is out there and it is not here but then again if they want to go walking in the country they get a bit annoyed if they can\rquote t.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Which cropped up a few times last year\'85people couldn\rquote t go walking.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Because of the events of last year they couldn\rquote t go walking\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 People say that farming is going become more big scale, bigger farms.  I don\rquote t know if it can, not
 in this area where we have lots of little farms.  What are they going to do, they are not exactly going to start up a co-operative or something are they.  I can\rquote t see that happening.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What do you think of the way that the media represented FMD?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 It seemed
 to be in the news all the time.  Both in the papers and TV a lot and then it suddenly sort of it was as if it had stopped when it still was happening.  Like somebody said the other week that is old news now got to move on.  That is the way they see it.  
Yes, it was a bit frustrating really because it leads you to a false sense of security as if you almost believe maybe it has gone away when you read in the local news there are still cases coming in. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Do you feel that you were forgotten about?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I think Cumbria as a whole think we just almost, oh well it\rquote s   just Cumbrians.   I thought there was a lot more on the main news, there was a lot more about Devon then that is nearer for them to get to, isn\rquote 
t there?  Yes, I do there was an awful lot about Devon all to do with about how hotels lost a lot of business and that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 How about the local news?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 The local news were very good, they were. 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par It must have been really strange, I guess for a short period of time FMD was international news
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, I know,
 this is what I said.  When I first saw the news on that day I said well that is Wiggonby and my neighbours said no it is not it is known as Great Orton Airfield.  I said it is Wiggonby Airfield, because I have always been here and I have always felt it w
a
s Wiggonby, it has never had a signpost up or anything and you just think it is Wiggonby airfield.  So at the time I was really miffed about that.   I thought that it is not on it is Wiggonby it is not Great Orton it is nearer to us than it is to them.  B
u
t it was afterwards I thought well maybe it is for the best if it Great Orton.  The name kept coming up and you wonder if there are loads of people driving looking for Great Orton it is actually called Wiggonby imagine it would have been bombed with peopl
e.  And not only that you think what about the value of your houses, is it going to reduce the value of the houses when you sell. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Because they have changed the name?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, Watchtree, lovely.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What is this all this about?}{\insrsid9006048  }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par Well what is any of it about, what about DEFRA you what was old MAFF.  It is just name isn\rquote t it, it is not an improvement on what they do, is it?  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What about the rest of your family, how are they?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I am the only one that actually lives here now, out of my family.  My brother has a business and he seems to be one of the few people who didn\rquote 
t seem to be too hurt. I asked him at the beginning, I said has it affected you.  He said it hadn\rquote t quite but it 
probably would do if it got much worse.  He actually puts up farm buildings and makes trailers and things like that.  He has got a few different things going on.  He works for some other businesses as well, sawmills and things like that so he has not got 
a
ll his eggs in one basket, he has got other work on so I think he is able to keep going because of the other work.  I think if it had been farm connected then that probably would not have lasted.  I think that is why he has done well because it covers a w
ider spectrum.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What do you think now about the way the site is being managed?  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Somebody said that they were going to be working up there for 10 years and somebody else said 25.  Well I want to know the truth so I look forward to the visit, I want to actu
ally see the place.  I mean I have obviously been past, I have been up on my bike last summer and you really can\rquote 
t see a lot from the road, just a big pile of mud at the moment and sort of diggers digging.  I will be interested to see it and find out a bit
 more about it but they are having struggle where they have built this big wall round it.  I suppose it is just the thought of if anything did leak out of it is a worry. It would be awful but they reckon that will never happen now they have built this wal
l, they have got it all under control and they do check the water.  I have seen people going down the road there and checking it. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Are you confident\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well yes I think so but then on the other hand it is all very well them checking the water but who knows whether \endash 
 well are they going to show us the results, are the results anywhere to be seen.  I think we just have kind of got used to it.  It has been up there that long it is one of those things that we try not to think about any more, I suppose.  We thoug
ht about it too much last year to worry about it this year.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Are they causing you any problems now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 The only problems as I say are the roads.  And these tanker drivers that try to knock you off the road coming along.  Thing like because it is just a mess.  There is a huge, huge hole I don\rquote 
t know which way you came but I presume you didn\rquote t come from Carlisle.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 No.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 There is the biggest hole in the road on the way to Carlisle.   I mean I know that in the winter you get frost and that causes a few holes but not as big as that, it is really bad and I can\rquote t believe it is still there.  I don
\rquote t know whether anybody has complained but.  When you drive along it you have either  to go to the middle of the road which is dangerous because if someone comes round the cor
ner then that it or you have to go almost up the grass verge to avoid this hole.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I\rquote ll avoid that.
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par If you are going toward Carlisle, you will see it if you go that way, you can\rquote t miss it.  As I say, you either go through it or you have to drive on the verge to make sure you don\rquote t crash into anything coming the other way.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I presume that wasn\rquote t there before?
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par No.  I mean the roads are in a really bad state.  They did widen one or two bits last year for the lorries on corners and things but other bits have c
ome worse for wear.  Obviously there is still the local traffic going back and forward every day plus all these vehicles.  It is not just tankers it is all the people who are working up there, driving off places.  I don\rquote 
t know how many people are up there, but that is another interesting thing?
\par 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 Do you think they listened to your concerns within the village?
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par No not really.  There is not much point in complaining because you know you won\rquote 
t get anywhere.  We met with the head of DEFRA, we had a meeting with him.  That was local - Carlisle.  They were just the usual flannel, they just cover themselves.  At the time we were all concerned about it but we knew it was a bit of waste of time.

\par 
\par We had this petition that we got signed by people.  We must have got hundreds of signatures on this petition.  I went and stood on Siloth Market and I got people to sign it.  There were only two people who wouldn\rquote 
t sign it.  One of them just said I don\rquote t want to and another one said I don\rquote t agree.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What was the petition for?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 It was when they were bringing these animals from other areas.  That was what we were petitioning against and most people I spoke to were in definite agreement with that.  Not just Cumbr
ians, people from South Scotland as well or the North East they were all agreeing, oh yes we will sign it.  So this got  was sent to the Headquarters or wherever it got sent to but you think you know it isn\rquote 
t going to do any good, but you feel you have to make the effort, you have got to do something to vent your anger,  you felt we had done our bit.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So feelings were quite high in the village?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes they were then, in fact I went down to one of the meetings at the village hall and it wasn\rquote t actually meant to be an open meeting, I don\rquote 
t think.   It was meant to be the Parish Council meeting and then a meeting with the DEFRA people afterwards and it got slightly out of hand.  People wanted to say their bit and it wasn\rquote t really the idea of the meeting. 
\par 
\par I just wish that a year ago I had started writing a diary, at the time, that would have been a good idea, wouldn\rquote t it, to actually do it then, what was going on, and \'85.. 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par I guess it would have been\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Oh, no, no, I wish that I personally at the time had thought and actually kept a diary it would have been a useful thing to have had it is always one of these things with hindsight you think of.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What about the science of FMD, do you think it was ever explained properly?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 There was so many stories about where it had
 come from, stories about coming from abroad and who had brought it in the first place.  I just hope it has gone away, that was the end of it.  It is worrying when you hear on the news that there might be another case.  It may flare up again.  There are a
ll things like about how the good weather and it was meant to be better if it was hot weather.  Well that can\rquote 
t be right because it was summer when it was happening.  And then things like the birds carrying and the wind well they are natural ?? you can\rquote t stop  then.  As I say it was like an unknown phenomena, it came from nowhere, it was just a \'85
\par 
\par There was bits in the local paper, people answering things that people, questions about how it all ?? and then there was all that carry on about whether to vaccinate them or that was ?? other countries vaccinate.  
\par 
\par And, of course, then there was talk of the 67 outbreak, everybody goes back to that and how they were buried on the farm instead of having these pyres and driving them miles and miles.  So I don\rquote t know whether that would be the answer or not.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I think they used lime in 1967...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 They would - the water table is lower that is what they are saying - there is no easy answer is there for any of it?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Did you see anything good came out of last year ?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I haven\rquote t noticed anything yet. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par Good is probably the wrong word, positive.  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 No, I haven\rquote t seen anything positive yet.
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par Do you think this has brought the community together\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Perhaps, perhaps it did.  I think in this day and age communities are not the same as it used to be.  You get a lot of people moving out of towns into the country, a lot 
of strangers and with the way that people jump in a car and go places and you don\rquote t see people the same.  You don\rquote t get to talk to people.  
\par 
\par And yes you just walk out of the door get in your car and drive off.  People don\rquote t have the time any more these days, have they. Time is very important to people rushing here, rushing there.  I can\rquote 
t say honestly myself I have noticed anything myself anything positive.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 What was the worse thing about last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 The worst thing?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 The worse for you in particular?}{\insrsid9006048 
\par 
\par The worse thing.  Difficult to say, it was all pretty bad.  I think the total confusion about not understanding it, not knowing what was going on.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Loss of control\'85}{\insrsid9006048 
\par 
\par Oh, yes, definitely.  I mean you could say the worse thing was seeing all those piles of animals lying, that was pretty bad but the whole thing really.  I can\rquote t even specify one thing that was the worse thing, it was just the whole thing was...

\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 You said that you felt a bit down. 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 It just the fact that it seemed as if it was never ending it was all there was, there was nothing you could do, you couldn\rquote t do anyhting, you felt helpless really.   
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Thinking now about the future, about living round here, what are your thoughts about that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I love living here and I don\rquote t ever want to move.  I have never had any thoughts of moving at all.  I mean I built this place for myself to live in and it hasn\rquote t put me off living here.   I wouldn\rquote 
t say I would move because of that.  The next door neighbours are moving but it is not because of that, different reas
ons.  No, I am quite happy to stay here. I love living here, it is peaceful, quiet, handy enough for the town, the motorways, everything.  I like living here and I have certainly no plans to move.  That wouldn\rquote t have any effect on that , it doesn
\rquote t worry me that much that I would say right I want to get away from it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 What got you through the events of last summer?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Got me through?  I suppose being able to talk on the phone.  I suppose communication with different people, ??? yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Did your phone bill change last year? 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, I had forgotten about that.  Yes, very good, yes, but I supposed I saved on fuel I wasn\rquote t going far apart from when I had to go miles round out of the way, that was the other thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 So was it just chatting to friends, family?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Did you listen to local radio very much?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I can\rquote t say that I did much actually.  I don\rquote t really listen to local, certainly not Radio Cumbria.  My mum does.  I know that that they did cover it very well.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 If things could have bee
n managed differently, if you could have changed the way things were managed last year what would you do? 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well, do you mean the government or\'85?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I guess specifically in relation to your situation.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 {\insrsid9006048 Well things like being told about things better, better 
information about what was happening with the roads and things.  I think that is one of the main things.  Yes I did think that they should have brought the army in a lot earlier because of \'85..
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }\pard \ql \fi284\li0\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 Anything else that would make your life easier living...?
\par }\pard \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 I don\rquote t think so \endash  I wish they hadn\rquote t done it they had put it somewhere else..
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par So there was a lack of communication?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes. Mostly, I think so.  They obviously did what they could didn\rquote t they.  I think that they could have looked at a better road system really.  There was times when they tried to have a one way system and you didn\rquote 
t know whether it was meant to be for lorries or for everybody, or what.  There was one night, I was driving back from town, and there was a no entry sign a red sign with a white bit
 and I thought is that general or is that for certain people.  I though I had better ask.  So I asked one of the people on the roadside - Snowy men.  I said what is this all about, is this for everybody.  He said we have got some new drivers on the lorrie
s and it just to show then which way for them to go.  I said so it is alright for us to go, he said yes.  Well I thought they don\rquote t make that obvious, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 You end up just going round the houses.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, you end up going the long way round because there was stories of how you got fined \'a360 if you go down this road, on the spot fines.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 For...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Going down one of the roads that was closed.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Really!
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes.  So best not risk it really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Snowy\rquote s wagons got everywhere\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes, big company.
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par Lots of stories there.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Yes.  One of them was on the other night.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 Oh, yes.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Something about them going to be done for something.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Yes, some investigations weren\rquote t they.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Mmmm.
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par What about now what do you think this project can do?
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par I presume the idea of the project if anything in the future similar was to happen then things will be able to be better organised or better handled maybe in a slightly different way or better.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I wonder if you have anything that you think would be an appropriate response to the project\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Well, we all want some compensation.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Compensation?
\par }{\insrsid9006048 
\par We did think about that at one stage.  I actually broke down and the AA man towed me back home and I was talking to him on the way back in the tow truck.   He said that h
e lived near Longtown and they had this pyre had been burning for days, weeks, whatever and he said that they had all put a claim in.  I said really, did you, he said yes, how much did you get?  He said \'a31000.  I said very nice, I wouldn\rquote 
t mind a \'a31000 myself.  
\par 
\par I mentioned it to my neighbour. He said yes I think we should claim for the smell, the inconvenience and everything else. I think he actually did a letter but I don\rquote t think he didn\rquote t do anything with it \endash 
 he never actually got round to sending it off.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 Right\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 No I didn\rquote t, no I just thought I better hadn\rquote t.  It is almost like you might get \'85 it is almost like you shouldn\rquote t be doing that.  So I don\rquote t know.  
\par 
\par I think there is a lot of stories about a lot of people making a lot of money out of it wasn\rquote 
t there?  You know, I suppose the disinfectant company will be fairly well off now, probably some foreign company.  Sorry I am getting off track.  What were we talking about?
\par 
\par Well I think that the biggest worry at the moment is the roads.  As I say, they
 are in a state of disrepair is what you would call it.  I know that the frost in winter has some effect on roads and each year the roads do get little cracks and little holes but not as bad as they are now, it is a lot worse than that.  I think that woul
d be the major thing at the moment that we would like to see improved round this area would be the roads.   They are just a mess.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 I\rquote ll go back to the question I asked you a few moments ago, is there anything I have missed that you think\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 No, I don\rquote t think so.  They wanted to know what people wanted it to be used for afterwards, the site.  You know recreational - but I don\rquote t know what could you use it for really.  I don\rquote 
t think there is much you can do with it.  I don\rquote t think anybody would really want to go up there and\'85
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9006048 You wouldn\rquote 
t think so, but I guess in time maybe \'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid9006048 
\par }{\insrsid9006048 Recreational use! No, I don\rquote t think so, not even in ten years time, I don\rquote t think so, would you really?  There are other places you would rather go.
\par 
\par It is always going to be there you won\rquote 
t ever forget.  It will be just pushed to the back, out of the way, it is there but try not to think about it.   Just at the time it was a nightmare but as I say it has been a lot worse for people directly involved - farmers and even the people that were 
actually doing the culling it must have been an awful job for them. 
\par }{\b\insrsid9006048 
\par 
\par 
\par }}