{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 
page number;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super 
\sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid3492990\rsid3619708\rsid5000112\rsid7734344\rsid8914291\rsid11497253\rsid12386404\rsid12469437\rsid14577591\rsid15675895}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}
{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min3}{\version9}{\edmins5}{\nofpages23}{\nofwords5743}{\nofchars32741}{\nofcharsws38408}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2551\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot3492990 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15675895 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15675895 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15675895 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15675895 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid15675895 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid3492990 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid15675895 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM21
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs18\insrsid15675895 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid5000112 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs18\insrsid15675895 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15675895 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15675895 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname 
date}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 26}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}26/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid15675895 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Date of birth: 1971
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15675895 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15675895 Occupation: Group 4}{\cs20\f0\super\insrsid15675895 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\f0\fs20\super\insrsid15675895 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid15675895  }{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Group 1 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15675895 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid15675895 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid15675895 
I arrived on a very dark night, parked along the minor road and stumbled toward the large brick house cursing my lack of a torch.  A and his partner N rent this farmhouse from their farming neighbours.  The back door opened into a small cosy kitchen. To t
he right N and her mother, who was visiting from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}W Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
, were sitting watching television. 4 year old R was racing up and down the living room astride a pull-along toy.  'Not quite a year old' M was steadfastly pursuing his older step-brother on all
 four limbs.  After being introduced to the family, A and I settled around the kitchen table.  N wandered in and out collecting food for the family.  I switched the taped on.
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Can you tell me a little bit about you and your background?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 My name is A.  I\rquote m going to be 31 in a few weeks time.  I\rquote m born and bred in the south as you can probably gather from the accent. I\rquote 
m Reading born and bred.  I left school at the age of 16 with not too many qualifications, didn\rquote t know what to do, so I basically applied for 
a post at the bottom rung of the administrative grades at the Intervention Board which is a Government Department in Reading.  Basically promoted my way up through the ranks, moved to London, worked in Guildford and done various things, various grades for
 the Civil Service and then met N and moved up here in 1999, settled down as you can hear [baby noises in background] and got a family [laughter].  So that\rquote s in a vague nutshell.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So why did you move to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895  I just like the North and it just so happened that I met N and she\rquote s Whitehaven born and bred and she\rquote s worked at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} so [PAUSE]  I\rquote ve been to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} before and knew it was a place that I could settle.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So was N working down South?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 No we just met over the internet.  I used to work in Guildford at MAFF which is now DEFRA, at their IT support Dep\rquote 
t and I used to work in PC support solving people's IT problems over the phone and she had a problem with an excel spreadsheet [LAUGHTER] and it went from there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Did you get a transfer to the North?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes, I transferred to the Carlisle Office in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}Lowther Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 at Eden Bridge House, just as a General Section Manager, administering Common Agricultural Policy scheme.  But previously in my career I had been an Inve
stigation Officer for the Intervention Board, which was actively investigating agricultural fraud throughout the country, throughout the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}UK{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
.  Having been back in a year and a couple of years at other sections I thought well, I\rquote ve got my management experience, I\rquote 
ve done this, I want to get back out, so I applied to become a MAFF Field Officer which would basically mean going out and doing retrospective checks as they go in on claims for various subsidies.  But I was I confirmed as being a Field Officer on the 19}
{\f0\super\insrsid15675895 th}{\f0\insrsid15675895  of February and on the 23}{\f0\super\insrsid15675895 rd,}{\f0\insrsid15675895  I think it was, sort of , Foot and Mouth  kicked off so I haven\rquote 
t actually done any normal field officer duties as yet, so I\rquote m not really too sure what to expect out there but it will be interesting.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So you don\rquote t have a background in farming or agriculture?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Not at all.  I lived in a semi rural area of Reading about 4 to 5 miles west of the town.  {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Major{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType
}}town{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose},  20 minutes by car, woodlands and fields 5 minutes up the road, so it w
as a lovely situation to be in.  But my mother was born in south London and had a secretarial background but she did a lot of voluntary work for the Parents' Playgroup Association and various other things and she\rquote 
s actually now a registered School Inspector.  My father was born and raised in Hertfordshire and then he lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose}, he was in the RAF, he\rquote s actually a Forensic Scientist so completely\'85
   One of my best friends from primary school, his father was a Farm Manager for one of the big estates in the area so I knew what rural life was all about but not directly.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Is N's background farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 No not at all.  It is just typical town, Whitehaven, that sort of thing.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So was it a bit of a culture shock?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 We actually stayed with N's mum in C M, right out on the west coast for a while.  We stayed there for a couple of months and then one evening\'85 When I first moved up, I had a week's annual leave because our oldest isn\rquote 
t actually mine, he\rquote s N's from another relationship, so I had a week bonding with him, I mean I\rquote ve known him since he was this big [shapes size of a baby with his hands]\'85
So I had a week off and in that week I trawled round all the letting agents and everything but it just didn\rquote t work out, we we
re struggling to find somewhere, so N just picked up the Cumberland News [local newspaper] one night and saw this place being offered for rent in the private section and we were in a couple of weeks later, so it\rquote s wonderful. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 You quite like it? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yeh, people don\rquote t bother you.  We see our landlord and landlady an old couple\'85 that\rquote s their farm [next door about 100 metres down the minor road], but their son farms now, they\rquote 
ve retired to a house in the village and we see them regularly, they\rquote ve got 3 children, 3 grand children.  They\rquote ve got their own children so it\rquote 
s nice, but they never bother you.  You nip in for a coffee or what ever every now and again, but it\rquote s just the feeling when I\rquote m driving home from work, being office based predominantly at the moment, to think that I\rquote 
m actually going home [EMPHASIS], getting away from everything is nice.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Going back to last year, there you are on the 19}{\b\f0\super\insrsid15675895 th}{\b\f0\insrsid15675895  investigating subsidies fraud and by the 23}{\b\f0\super\insrsid15675895 rd}{\b\f0\insrsid15675895  there\rquote 
s an awareness of foot and mouth outbreak, so what happened then?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Bedlam ensued basically.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par At work?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 At work, yeh.  I mean people realised the scope of it all and emergency plans were put in place.  Basically the email went round from senior managers at Eden Bridge House [As work place] to say if anybody wants
 to volunteer for overtime office work at Rose Hill, Hadrian House, where the State Veterinary Service is, then obviously put your name forward, so I volunteered and it was actually on the Saturday when we had our first confirmed case in Northumberland, 
\lquote Heddon on the Wall\rquote 
.  I was actually met downstairs at Hadrian House, Saturday or Sunday one of those days, by the Senior Animal Health Officer for the area, and that was it.  I went into the office and quite honestly it was a waste of time going in, they p
aid me triple time for nothing basically.  I just sat around the office doing pretty much nothing all day long because people didn\rquote 
t know what they were doing, simple as that.   I was tasked with trying to start a registered filing system going, but every time we tried to go and get the information they wanted on the files, people were saying, well no we\rquote 
re not finished with it yet, we\rquote re not finished, so we were subsequently scalded for not having the system ready but nobody was giving us information to fi
le, so it left quite a bitter taste in my mouth that first weekend.  It was just a weekend they wanted and then they realised on Monday with everything else, that all the cases that were coming in, they thought well we\rquote 
re going to need people on loan here,
 so they borrowed a lot of staff from Eden Bridge House.  I left it about a week, because out of loyalty to my then manager,  I wanted to see a few things out on my old section, but then from February time, I  went out and basically volunteered and was on
 foot and mouth duties ever since. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Presumably because of some of your training around the subsidies investigation, you must have had some sort of background in terms of going on to farms and talking to farmers?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes.  I mean I was quite comfortable with t
hat, there was no problem but the way things were, there was no time for training, you just had to do it the best you can, nobody had any protocols in place or any guide lines it was just a question of, \lquote there\rquote s your kit , go for it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So these were farms, like dangerous contact, or...?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Personally at the time N was literally due to give birth to George, he was due in early April, well actually the end of March but he was two weeks late, so at the time I just said to my immediate line manager, I said, look, I don
\rquote t care where I am, whatever I\rquote m doing, if the call comes, I\rquote m going.  There was a lot of typical Civil Service bureaucracy; but you can\rquote t [EMPHASIS],   if you\rquote re on a farm you\rquote ll not be allowed off, you\rquote 
ll be dirty ,this, that and the other.  I said, I don\rquote t care; if the call comes I\rquote 
m going.  So they thought round it and thought well the best way is to keep you clean, so I actually stayed away from IPs [infected premises] and DCs [dangerous contacts].  My first task was to drive, obtain a map that co
ntained an IP and a one or three kilometre zone, and basically I was tasked with highlighting the residential areas within that zone and basically spent all day driving around knocking on just general public's house and doors asking them if they had any s
usceptible pets that could suffer the disease, and if they did I had to serve a form D notice which meant that they couldn\rquote t move it and a vet would come along with a possible view to slaughter.  So I was responsible for asking people if they
\rquote d like me to put their pets down.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So this was like cloven hoofed animals?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
Yes, pet goats, pot-belly pet pigs, pet sheep, anything like that. Anything that was susceptible to contracting the disease.  We had to establish what was there.  I mean I can see the logic behind it, but the first day we actually went to a place near D, 
B
, along there, and they had a pet goat and we were talking to the mother and the father, and then the young girl whose goat it was actually came in just at the point when we mentioned the word slaughter, so that was quite harrowing because we then had to 
explain to her what was actually going to happen.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So this was a healthy cull of pet animals? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And this was quite early on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 This was within the first two or three weeks, because after that first two or three weeks we realised we were always going 
to be working three weeks behind [PAUSE] because the first diseased animal that was discovered in the abattoir in Essex we know [EMPHASIS] had gone through Longtown  or Carlisle mart three weeks before, so we knew [EMPHASIS] that we were three weeks behin
d and they just panicked basically.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 While you were visiting these non- farming households, were you working in the office as well?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895  [ EMPHASIS].   Yes, there was a lot [EMPHASIS] of work in the office.  Basically these maps came through from our main ma
pping section, they were then given to myself and various other people who put them into an order. We then went through and highlighted the areas where we wanted people to go in that zone, we put them on the file, people came in we handed them out, we too
k them ourselves.  So I was predominantly involved with actually organising that side as well as actively getting out there and doing. So I had both hats on in that respect.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Did you have local people working there as well; because I can imagine it couldn\rquote t have been that easy for you, not having that local knowledge?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895  
\par It was difficult yes, but in the main it was local people, Field Officers were doing it, and normal {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} based officers, obviously involved, those that weren\rquote t  involved in IPs.  Y
es, we also had a lot of volunteers, other Field Officers from other sites around the country, we had Environment Agency people helping us, we had all sorts of people out there.  A lot [EMPHASIS] of people were local but a lot [EMPHASIS] of people weren
\rquote t.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Were you putting in quite long hours?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Um.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So what was happening in your private life?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 There was a lot of stress; there was a lot [EMPHASIS] of stress. Obviously because\'85[pause] 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Because your wife was about to give birth?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes [LAUGHTER]   exactly\'85 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par And it got to her? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid15675895 It did get to her, yes.  I mean Ns Mum is brilliant, I mean she live out at C M but at the drop of a hat she\rquote d be here to look after the children, there\rquote s not a problem with that, which helps.  Sh
e actually did come through and stayed with us for a while to start with, but I was putting in excess of eighty hours a week, every week, for a long time. But luckily when N went in\'85  George was born on the 5}{\f0\super\insrsid15675895 th}{
\f0\insrsid15675895  of April\'85 well I actually had four weeks off.  So I had pretty much most of April off, paternity leave, annual leave, so it was actually [PAUSE]\'85
 I think I probably caught myself just before it was getting on top of me.  I had that really [EMPHASIS]  nice break and went back fresh as a daisy, and I actually went back to different duties after that.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So you'd had about 4 weeks of long stressful working days.. Did you notice the stress?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 It was getting to me before.  I was tired mainly, that was the main thing.  I was tired before and obviously [PAUSE]\'85
 I think I was probably just living off of adrenalin with the thought of my first child coming along, so there was a lot of stress.  But obviously, although we had a couple of sleepless nights for feeding and stuff, because N breastfed, she was always say
ing look, just sleep, just sleep, I\rquote ll need you during the day, so it worked out very nicely and to be honest with you, we haven\rquote t had any horrific stories of a lot of stress and sleepless nights, I mean they\rquote 
ve both been brilliant so it\rquote s been very lucky really.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 You live quite rural and I know there\rquote s been some outbreaks, so what\rquote s it been like here?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Oh everybody went down here, there\rquote s only one farm that I know survived here.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And the people you\rquote re renting from?  [who are neigbours] 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yeh they went d
own quite early on, the back end of April.  It just typifies their attitude towards me [EMPHASIS]    actually, because they knew [EMPHASIS]   I worked for DEFRA, they knew [EMPHASIS] what I was doing.  The first people they rang when they were confirmed w
as me, to say, we hope it doesn\rquote t affect the work you\rquote re doing.  They\rquote re a wonderful family; they didn\rquote t deserve to go through what they went through, it was horrific.  The farm\rquote 
s been in their family six generations and it\rquote s six generations of hard [EMPHASIS]    work, buried in a field over there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Is it a mixed farm?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 They predominately bred sheep and cattle for fattening for the food chain.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Like store cattle?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yeh, it was horrific, but it\rquote s nice to see the sheep out in the field now they\rquote ve got some back.  They\rquote ve had  their four months  [clean up post FMD] so now they\rquote ve got no restrictions any more.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 You\rquote re very new to the area so neighbours are quite important aren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 They are very [EMPHASIS]    important and we actually had }{\f0\insrsid12386404 [baby}{\f0\insrsid15675895 \rquote s}{\f0\insrsid12386404 ]}{\f0\insrsid15675895  christening in July in  the pub and I\rquote 
ve never really known what the reaction was going to be when people realised I worked for DEFRA  as a Field Officer, because it\rquote s not just DEFRA in the office. I\rquote m the person that if they\rquote ve made a mistake on their claim, I\rquote 
m the one that\rquote s going to pick it up, but I\rquote ve never had a cross word with anybody [PAUSE],  they\rquote re very, very [EMPHASIS]  supportive, the Cumbrians are I think, a breed above everybody else to be honest. Very special people.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Did you yourself feel isolated or restricted whilst this was going on around you or where you too busy getting on with your work?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 I didn\rquote t really [EMPHASIS] give it too much thought C to be honest.  I suppose if I\rquote d sat down and thought about it I probably would have thought,
 I am stuck out here on my own a little bit, but I never really thought that and as I say, the support with the people here [PAUSE]   I don\rquote t think it really entered my mind to be honest.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So in terms of a social life it didn\rquote t really affect you , but I suppose all of this is eclipsed by the birth of your child?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Indeed [LAUGHTER].   I mean to be quite honest with you I don\rquote t have a social life [LAUGHTER].  I\rquote ve got a good friend, he\rquote s from a farming family and he\rquote s just at Sebergham, and he comes round her
e and we sometimes go to the pub, but at the end of the day he\rquote s working on foot and mouth as well and he was putting longer hours than I was so we never really\'85
 It did have an impact, you know, I would have to think twice before I could consider going out for a drink or a meal.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Is that because of the foot and mouth per se, not because of your rural position?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Because of foot and mouth, yeh.  Yeh, definitely.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So you had four weeks break, what happened when you returned to work, end of April was it?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par It wa
s just into early May actually and they did try to stick me in just a General Licensing section in one of the Portacabins at Rose Hill [Defra Carlisle base], but when my line manager found out about that she went through the roof and said, what the hell h
ave you got one of my field officers doing sat behind a desk, so I didn\rquote 
t actually start the tasks they wanted me to and I was straight out, and now I went straight on to licensed movements of animals.  So people who had been granted a license for animal we
lfare, where the animals have grazed the field to mud ,they could move them under strict bio-security regime, so I was the field officer responsible for doing that. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 They were the clean farms? }{\f0\insrsid15675895  
\par 
\par They were the clean farms. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Farms that hadn\rquote t gone down?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Farms that hadn\rquote t gone down.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And hadn\rquote t been in the contigious cull?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 That\rquote s correct. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So you were still seen as clean? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes, I remained clean.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Awful these words aren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Either dirty or clean, but at the end of the day it\rquote s the best word to describe it really.  I think one or two of the older hands I\rquote ve spoken to did take exception to being referred to as dirty.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So what was that like going onto these farms, because presumably these are farms that are struggling?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Struggling very [EMPHASIS]   much.  It\rquote 
s a mixed bag to be honest with you [PAUSE].  Predominately, I think every farm you went to is, "Oh  bloody DEFRA" because at the  end of the day I was actually going there to do them a favour really.  I was helping them to mo
ve their stock, which helped them, but you always got the 'bloody DEFRA' this that and the other or stronger in many cases, but hopefully I like to think to my interpersonal skills [PAUSE]\'85
  I spoke their own language and when we actually got to the moving
 of the animals there was always a Veterinary Officer present who inspected all the animals on the farm wherever they were on the holding, and then when he said yes ok, he signed the license and then I took over.  So what I always [EMPHASIS] used to do is
, I always used to ensure that I was there to help, I didn\rquote 
t want to stand there looking like a spare one at a wedding.  I was dropping down the trailer tailgate, I was opening up the tag, I was manning gates, I was herding the stock on.  We got to the fiel
d, I was the first one out of the car to open the gate into the field so that he could back up, and that way I gained the respect of the farmer because I showed him that I was prepared to help him properly, not just, I\rquote m here, I\rquote 
m DEFRA. That actually went down well and I didn\rquote t have a bad problem at any [EMPHASIS] farm I went to and I must have done well over twenty. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And no disrespect but considering you haven\rquote t got a farming background. .}{\f0\insrsid15675895  . 
\par 
\par Yeah and indeed considering the Cockney accent [laughter]  . 
. . I just thought to myself at the end of the day, I am here to help these people.   One thing I have taken in  my 14 years to date, working for the Civil Service, is that while a lot of people don\rquote 
t deem it as being directly helping  the public, but I }{\i\f0\insrsid15675895 am}{\f0\insrsid15675895  a public servant and by doing what I\rquote m doing, I am helping members of the public, so that\rquote 
s  the way I see it  and I am prepared to get covered in shit. . .sorry. . .
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 No it\rquote s okay. . .
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par . . .as I did many times.  I gained a lot of respect. One job we had, the chap was very irate because he\rquote d had the licence applied for, it was there but the vet tried to put him off until the following day. He stood his ground and said, \'93
no, you will come here tonight.\'94  By this time,  the vet had sent me home but I didn\rquote t go home, because I though this isn\rquote t right so I stayed around Rose hill (Headquarters).  15 minutes later I got a call, \'93oh you haven\rquote 
t gone home have you?\'94  U said, \'93no\'94 and he said, \'93can you be here\'94 and I said, I\rquote ll be there in 10 minutes. We started the job at twenty to five and the vet had done his job by half past five and I was there until  gone eight o
\rquote clock but  I didn\rquote t mind because that\rquote s the job I was paid to do and within five minutes of being there, I calmed the farmer down and he was fine.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So that period A,  you were still putting in long hours?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 I was doing  extremely long hours, 12 days minimum, probably upwards, 13, 14, 15 hours a day easy, and that was between May and up to July and then it took a turn, not for the worse but it got even more involved after that.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par So what happened? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
Basically the concern from the epidemiologist was that this disease was being spread by vehicles and people so they wanted to try and stop that and to impress on people, bio-security, cleansing on and off farms. So in July, I was tasked with setting up a 
bio-security unit. I was given  temporary  promotion  to  Higher Executive Officer to do that and basically 4 of us started driving round the area known as the \lquote Penrith Spur\rquote  (where FMD had spread), from 8/ 9 o\rquote 
clock in the evening through to 8/9 o\rquote clock in
 the morning, basically trying to catch people out moving the animals illegally. So we were doing a 12 hour shift, back into  the office for an hour  doing paperwork.  By the time you got back home, you were looking at 16/17 hour days, a couple of hours s
leep and back out again. And I did that for a month and in the end, I was on the verge of saying, \'93 I\rquote m sorry, I\rquote 
m not prepared to do this anymore but they offered me an indoor job to actually manage it. So I took that opportunity, obviously with the home s
ituation and actually ran the Section from home.  And then I became. . .I mean it originally started with 4 of us doing this and then at the height of it, we had 122 of us doing  it and I was in charge of everybody and then  I got people on the management
 site to help me  out and I basically created the unit  and that allowed me then  to go back out and do Field management checks on the guys I }{\i\f0\insrsid15675895  }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
had out on the ground.   So I then spent, which was the nice part, the rest of my time, actually driving round mak
ing sure people were okay, making sure they were doing the job properly, answering any questions they had, putting my face around, just basically spent a lot of my time just driving around beautiful Cumbria which was quite nice.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Going back to those night stints, were there any incidents that stick out?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Erm  there are several incidents when people do see. . . .I mean basically the way I did it. . . if people want. . .I mean the managers wanted people out there,  to know we were  there, so I used to pick a 
village get out to the pub, make sure I was there at kicking out time, made sure I had my full Defra kit on. I had a clip board and a torch and my pass was there to see and  I used to make sure people saw me and if they did, word got round that DEFRA was 
around so if anything untoward was going on , they didn\rquote 
t know when to do it because we were doing them completely randomly.  One or two of my colleagues, I actually had to back up to senior management because allegations were made against them, unfounded a
llegations and extremely damaging allegations which were not true. So I had a lot of management responsibility for those people and I actually successfully managed to back the allegations away and make them look complete nonsense, which they were.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And were these to do with threat or force?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yeah, several of my people were threatened with shotguns. One chap we had to call the police to . . .well two or three actually, the red mist came down with these guys and you know,  it was not a nice time. Some of the 
guys I had, actually  it did leave a bit of a mental scar because it\rquote s not nice looking down the barrels of  a 12 bore. I mean if you think about it as logically as you can, if a guy pulls a gun on you and he\rquote 
s not shot you straight away, then he probably won\rquote t but . . .I mean one of my guy\rquote 
s, they had to reverse 60 miles an hour down a road and his car was practically a right off because his engine nigh on blew up because this guy chased him down in a tractor.  There were a lot of threats. I was never thre
atened directly. One of my officers, well 2 of them were physically assaulted. One of them was grabbed around the throat.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And this was just doing what they thought was in the course of their duty?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 This was actually enforcing  legislation to the  tee..  T
hey were doing nothing out of the context of  their protocols and guidelines. They were doing the job they were paid to do, enforcing the legislation everybody was aware of.  All the farmers were made aware of all the rules and regulations we were going t
o enforce, but people they\rquote d just had enough.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par So feelings were running high?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Very high. In certain areas it was almost no go zones.  A lot of faces were actually known, because we were using DEFRA field officers, a lot of people realised who they were.  S
o they could target their abuse at these people. And as I say, two were actually physically assaulted, one was actually 3, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}4 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} in the morning and with no police back up there and then, it
\rquote s  quite scary.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes very frightening. So feelings are r
unning high, I can see that from both sides and there are theories about people defying legislation for humanitarian reasons, to feed their stock and theories that people just had enough, what are your thoughts on this?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Yes and you could take it further a
nd say that some did it for callous reasons to get out of farming.  I know one man who did do that. He moved his stock purposefully, well he moved the stock closer to an infected premise and then we witnessed him driving to an infected site, ensured that 
he got close enough and then went back to his own farm and within a few weeks, he was confirmed [as an infected site].  But he purely did it because he has no children that are interested in farming, nobody coming through and he\rquote 
s of retirement age.   I think anyone would do the same in that situation quite honestly, but he was quite an aggressive man as well.  I think  possibly  because he was desperate.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 But in those cases you had powers to prosecute? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Oh yeah.  We could have done. We didn\rquote t  prosecute ou
rselves, Trading Standards were our prosecuting arm. We put the cases forward and it was up to them to take it on.  In many instances they actually used   a lot of self understanding of the situation because they had a lot of local Trading Standards Offic
ers.  I think they used a lot of lee way with many people. Some I don\rquote t think they should have done but others, I think they should have done and they did. So they didn\rquote t prosecute some people. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So that month when you were out there in the dead of night, was that the most difficult period?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes we always went in pairs but that doesn\rquote t compensate for closing the door at 9 o\rquote clock at night in the pitch black, leaving your wife and 2 small boys in th
e dead of night in a very isolated area. I was paranoid I think that something was going on.  There was one night, I went out without my mobile here by mistake but I thought it\rquote s okay, I\rquote m out with P, he\rquote 
s have his mobile with him so we\rquote re contactable. I got in the car and we were 3 or 4 miles up the road before I mentioned it to him and he said, \'93Oh my battery is running out, it won\rquote t last the night, I was hoping you\rquote d have yours.
\'94 So he took one look at my face and he said , \'93right come on\'94 and he turned round and he drove me back, so I came back in and got my mobile so I knew that }{\f0\insrsid3619708 [wife]}{\f0\insrsid15675895 
 could ring me, or I could ring her. So she could relax, otherwise it would have been a hell of a night for her, not knowing where I was and if something had happened here, not knowing what to do. I mean we are reasonable close to our neighbours but it
\rquote s a good 500 yard dash down the road, in the dead of night, rural, with a baby and a 4 year old. It was horrible, yeah it was quite a challenge and I quite enjoyed it to star
t with and I probably still enjoyed it at the end based on the work I was doing.  But I just couldn\rquote t handle the fact that they were here through the night without me.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Was there any time when }{\b\f0\insrsid12469437 [wife]}{\b\f0\insrsid15675895  actually asked you to stop?     
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Towards the end yeah.  I set the bio security unit up and I came into the office on the 6}{\f0\super\insrsid15675895 th}{\f0\insrsid15675895 
 August and probably about a week before that she asked if there was any chance of going back to doing the day work. So yeah she did get to that stage.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So it was okay to do that?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Yeah they did actually come to me and say, \'93 we want you to do this now and we want someone who\rquote s got their head screwed on, someone who\rquote s done these patrols, we want you to manage it and create a bio security unit.\'94
 So they did actually make the approach to me. So I grabbed it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So the bio security unit, was that all part of the clean up operation? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 No it was on going, it was just reinforcing the cleansing and disinfecting, ensuring that people weren\rquote t breaching their licensing conditions , so it was an ongoing thing. We\rquote ve still got guys doing that.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So you were manning that \endash  you weren\rquote t  going onto the farms?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par No none of my officers went onto the farms. We stayed on public highways, so it was a question of liasing with police, Trading St
andards, Senior Managers, Senior  Veterinary Officers, drawing up protocols,  guidelines, desk instructions.   I gave induction courses. I gave training sessions for the Police Officers.  I used to go in at half past five in the morning  for the people st
a
rting at 6 and do their  - because the  Police Officers were never the same  I had to do a generic brief every day . I created a filing system.  I was managing the people in the office. I was managing the people in the field. Yeah it got to the stage wher
e I thought I can\rquote t manage this on my own but they did get some more people in.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So still doing very long days and very intensive work?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 My long days probably stopped around October time.  So between May and October, I was putting in 70, 80, 90 hour weeks, 
every week.  At one stage I went 23 days without  a day off because I had to get the job done, or I felt I had to get the job done.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 In terms of you and your health, you\rquote re saying you never got that stressed out?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 I\rquote m one of those people who generally accepts what\rquote s thrown at me so I don\rquote t easily get stressed or flustered or fazed  but it was the tiredness, that\rquote 
s what was getting to me. The stress of the job, if something went wrong, I\rquote d shout about it for about 2 seconds and then find a way round it, just
 get on with it. So the stress I was under was purely the hours I was working and to be honest with you, it was quite a while into the outbreak where health and safety came into play and it was quite a long while into the outbreak where they actually real
ised that they should be looking after the staff. The whole outbreak has been marred by a \lquote we\rquote ve got to get it done at any cost\rquote  attitude and it was a long, long, time into this job that they 
\par Decided that they ought to look after their staff.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes I was just about to ask you, was there anywhere you could go to de-brief?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par No.  You could talk to your line managers. You could talk to your colleagues.  It\rquote s the only outlet you had.  But my line manager was generally so busy that you\rquote d never really see them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 They\rquote d just look at you glassy eyed?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par To be honest towards the end my line manager then was quite health and safety orientated so it was quite useful , but even then, it was  just something lacking, it just wasn\rquote t there. It wasn\rquote t until late on t
hat the Welfare Officer made regular visits to Rose Hill (HQ for DEFRA, Carlisle), but even then, if you think about it, he was looking after nigh on 5 to 600 staff, what chance did you get really [laughs].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 But during those critical periods, was their anyone you could turn to?
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par I had a lot of friends, working on foot and mouth.  They understood.  They were working on the same things and the one saving grace was [wife].  I could come back and just say something but she wouldn\rquote t be able to give me an opinion
 one way or the other. She would just listen and if she didn\rquote t think it was important, she would just  dismiss it, almost ignore it [laughs], but it just gave me the opportunity to  say something. Can\rquote 
t describe how I feel about her really, she\rquote s helped me get through it. 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Must have been quite stressful for her? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes, yes I\rquote m sure but you know, she\rquote s got the boys, She\rquote s got friends here, family, being Cumbrian. Towards the end, we used to always make sure that I had at least one day off  we\rquote d do something
 together every week . It got to every Thursday , we used to go to [play centres in the town], so A [4 year old] could blow off steam and I could sit down, have a pint, watch the children enjoy themselves. Just sit down and do something normal really [lau
ghs].  So we did sit down and make a conscious effort which was nice.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Do you feel the outbreak was handled as well as it could be?   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 No 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 That was a very definite no.  Do you want to elaborate on that? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 There should be a public inquiry funded by the Government and it should highlight the things that went wrong, because things did go wrong, badly wrong.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Do you think you\rquote ve got colleagues who feel the same?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Yes particularly people whom I\rquote m dealing with now.  I\rquote m actually checking files are in an auditable
 state for the EU auditors coming over and if the public could see what I see , what has been spent and who to and what for , well they would not be voted in at the next election and people would quite rightly lose their jobs. 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par Are there any sort of key areas that you feel need to be addressed? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par There was definitely a need for senior managers to be more aware of what the guys on the ground were doing.  It wasn\rquote 
t until well into this outbreak that any sort of positive feedback came back and that was when we actually got a  very, very good Regional Operations Director , R A, fantastic man  and he really, really cared about his staff  and he made sure that other m
a
nagers cared about their staff. He was there for about 7 or 8 months.  It was  a long way into  it when he cam on board.  We had J B there who quite frankly was as useless as a chocolate fire guard.  I think people would be horrified, absolutely horrified
 at various decisions made,  In the early days, various people have said to me retrospectively, if something came in, just pay it. One particular type of invoices that were paid n for various types of work, someone, somewhere  in senior management at 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} just made a decision to add 25%  and paid them an extra 25%.  No justification, it was just done and it has been done.  It\rquote s just disgusting, quite honestly.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 In terms of your future working with DEFRA, that\rquote s going to continue?}{\f0\insrsid15675895  
\par 
\par For the time being.  I\rquote ve reached the stage in my career, I\rquote ve being Executive officer which is the first management grade , I been there since 1996, I\rquote 
m temporary promotion  ? which is the next grade up,  but frankly, I reached a critical point just before Christmas when I thought where is this going and it did coincide with a time when a colleague of mine said \'93I\rquote 
m doing this, what do you think?\'94 and I\rquote m now setting the wheels in motion to set up a successful business which I hope will bring an end to my career. It\rquote s a sad thing but after 14 years, I\rquote 
m just fed up with the bureaucracy of being a civil servant.  What more can I say? It is a shame because I do enjoy helping people.  I mean you get very little recognition for what you do. IIP (Investors in People)  well it\rquote s just a badge .
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Can I just ask, your decision to get out, has that anything to do with the foot and mouth. .}{\f0\insrsid15675895  . 
\par 
\par . . . .it\rquote s being compounded by the way I\rquote ve seen people treated and the work I did last year, yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And that\rquote s people as in colleagues?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Work  colleagues, agency staff and yeah, personally I feel,  just in the early days. . .I have no problem with people on site at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}
, Senior managers included, the majority have been fine. It\rquote s the policy decisions coming from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}London{\*\xmlclose}.  You know, you had the ridiculous  situation of a vet in the field saying, \'93
this animal has not got foot and mouth, definitely not.  I will stake my career on it.\'94   Somebody  in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname Street}}Page Street{\*\xmlclose} turn round and say no, that\rquote s wrong, slaughter and they were slaughtered. 

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par So you can really understand a farmer\rquote s frustration.  Say for example who 's got a blood line going back six generations?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Terrifying.  I mean it\rquote s an awful thought to think that, it really is [PAUSE].  Being an investigator in the past, I\rquote 
ve always actually been reasonably cynical of farmers, seeing the frauds that I have seen being instigated, but quite honestly, I wouldn\rquote t wish what a lot of people have gone through on any body [EMPHASIS]    I really wouldn\rquote t, it\rquote 
s been horrendous.  Even the ones that have been slightly callous in their dealings and slightly mercenary in their attitudes, I still think the majority of it was done purely from \'85
 they seen a position where they had nowhere to go, they had nothing in the future for them unless they got slaugthered out.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 That\rquote s interesting because it\rquote s come from a perspective of someone who was actually checking out what was going on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Exactly, yes. That really is coming from somebody who was very cynical of farmers and took the feeling that you never saw a poor farmer, because the amount of farmers I\rquote 
ve seen with nice big brand new flash cars on their drive compared to my car.  You know, well I always used to think, well hang on a minute, something\rquote s not quite right here, but even then, I still would not wish the way they\rquote ve been treated
\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 So those tales of huge compensations, you think they are few and far between?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 They are few and far between. There are very few [EMPHASIS]  examples.  Less than five percent of the Cumbrian farmers that we
nt out had big cheques.  A lot had of people possibly got maybe two years worth of profit in one year, big deal, one year they couldn\rquote t work.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 And pedigree lines gone for some of them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 Exactly, yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid15675895 Is there anything that you would really like to go on the record?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid15675895 I don\rquote t think so.  I\rquote m actually quite glad that you asked me the question where I said, no, about things that have been handled and the public inquiry.  That is my bugbear.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\f0\insrsid15675895 I thanked A for his time . We had been talking for about 50 minutes}{\f0\insrsid15675895 
\par }}