{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f139\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f140\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f142\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f143\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f144\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f145\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f146\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f147\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{
\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid11994229\rsid12595540\rsid15351860\rsid15367792}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy11\hr14\min32}{\version3}{\edmins1}{\nofpages16}{\nofwords6921}{\nofchars39452}{\nofcharsws46281}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot12595540 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\headery708\footery708\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid11994229 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab \tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid12595540 Lancaster University
\par }{\fs20\insrsid11994229 Diary ID:       PM10}{\insrsid11994229                                        
\par 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs19\insrsid11994229 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid15367792 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs19\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid11994229 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid11994229 Information about diarist
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Date of birth: 1937
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 5}{\cs18\super\insrsid11994229 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs18\fs20\super\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 \chftn }{
\fs20\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Group 1 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Related agricultural workers to
 include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11994229\charrsid12595540 
\par }}}{\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\insrsid11994229 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname 
place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }{\insrsid11994229 
\par Week 1
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid11994229 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}
{\xmlattrvalue 3}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 11}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}Monday 11}{\b\super\insrsid11994229 th}{\b\insrsid11994229  March 2002{\*\xmlclose}
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Whilst watching the local TV news at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 18}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}6 p.m.{\*\xmlclose}
 there was a news item that caused us to reflect back on the events a year ago. A young lady had just left a court where she had been found guilty of assaulting a Police Officer and also being in change of an offensive weapon -\endash 
a knife. The judge had acquitted her of the offences, he showed leniency towards her. Last year during the FMD crisis she had returned to her home to find that her pet goat had been killed by slaughterers because the animal was within the 3 
km radius. She had gone berserk over this and threatened the Police Officer and others with the knife. She had to be forcibly restrained, she was very distraught over this killing.
\par Even after she had appeared in court and had been acquitted of all charges she showed great emotion not only being freed but also quite upset over the loss of the goat. Perhaps her actions didn\rquote 
t happen to a lot of other people who had similar things happen to them. However, the loss of a lot of pet animals and in some cases, needless slaughter of many farm animals still creates unhappy memories of 2001.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 2
\par Tuesday}{\insrsid11994229 
\par Whilst walking the dog I met a farmer from the edge of the village who has friends and stock in close proximity to the 2 land fill sites.
\par He is still very concerned about materials on these sites. The nearest site contained hundreds of carcasses. This has been completed and capped. He is concerned about leachate from this site and feels that it doesn\rquote 
t matter how much clay and soil were used to contain this site, the effects of heavy rain is bound to find a way down and also to drain it. He doesn\rquote t want to plough these fields, nor can he sell stock that have grazed the same fields.
\par There is pyre ash being tipped on the other site. Again, what happens to the rainwater that runs off this site? Also there are concerns about the large flocks of seagulls that visit both sites daily.
\par Another concern is what is happening to the open-cast coal site that is situated almost due south of Gilgarran Villag
e. The farmer I talked to today is concerned about this huge site. No coal has been moved from this site for months. There are concerns that this site is going to be filled with waste. Will it be from FMD sites? We, as a village, are very concerned about 
rumours of land fill on a huge scale. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Friday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Noticed that there was work being carried out on the top of the burial site. No villagers have commented on this, despite large yellow diggers operating.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Sunday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Work continuing on the burial site. Cannot make ou
t what kind of work is being done there
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 
\par 
\par Week 3
\par Monday}{\insrsid11994229 
\par Work is still going on at the burial site. I still don\rquote t know what is going on, but the diggers involved are the same as when animals were being buried there. When animals were being buried there last
 year, the smell coming from that site was terrible to say the least! It was not coming from the dead animals as most observers thought, but from decomposing waste material that had already been buried on the site prior to FMD.
\par When excavators dug into the
 soil to make trenches for the dead animals, they dug into this decomposing matter, hence the terrible smell. Despite the work that is going on there today, no comments from villagers are forthcoming. It seems to me that now that FMD has gone, the general
 public are not interested any more, unless they read something in the local papers written by some enterprising reporter!
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 4
\par Tuesday}{\insrsid11994229 
\par Work is still going on in the former burial site. Villagers don\rquote t seem to be bothered. FMD is gone, so nobody is interested any more.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Wednesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Whilst trying to gain comments from villagers over the effects of FMD, one or two comments from some individuals show concern about the outbreak }{\ul\insrsid11994229 last year}{\insrsid11994229 , but don\rquote 
t seem too concerned over any after effects, if any!
\par Two interesting comments suggest that (1) the outbreak was started deliberately by \lquote this country\rquote 
 in collusion with the agriculturists of the E.E.C so as to concentrate meat production in Europe and leave the UK to concentrate on arable farming; (2) The outbreak was s
tarted by a terrorist attack. The Government would not declare this because it would cause widespread panic.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Thursday 23:25 hours
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Huge fire at the site where pyre ash is being tipped. 250,000 used tyres caught fire. Arson is suspected. Fire fighters tried to contain the blaze, but couldn\rquote t use large amounts of water in case water courses became contaminated.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Friday 05:00
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Fire still blazing at the pyre ash site. Later in the morning the fire was showing signs of dying down, apparently it was left to burn itself out. Much heavy smoke pollution was evident, drifting south west for about nine miles.
\par Reading the local evening paper about the blaze, there was also a report that villagers from Disington (1\'be miles from Gilgarran) wer
e complaining of the foul smell from both waste sites. Parish councillors are very concerned about this. Does it coincide with work currently being carried out on the burial site?
\par The smell from these sites plus the fact that animals were buried on one site and pyre ash plus the huge fire from the other site all happening this week is causing concern in this area. But once this \lquote hue and cry\rquote 
 dies down, people will soon forget about it all.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 5
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Monday through to Friday, observed work on top of the burial site. Don\rquote 
t know if any work is still going on on the northern and western sides. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Friday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Local weekly paper carried the report on the recent large fire that occurred on the Alco site last week when 250,000 tyres caught fire somehow. It was intersting to
 read that the fire brigade did not use any water to extinguish the blaze in case pollution occurred in water courses. The fire was left to burn itself out.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Saturday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Burial site \endash 
 it looks like there is new soil being tipped on top for some reason. No reported comments froim the Parish Council over this, despite very vociferous objections by them over the use of this and the Alco site in the past. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Sunday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Talked to our local County Councillor (who lives in this village). He feels very strongly that these tw
o sites are dangerous. He thinks that both sites are a health hazard risk due to obnoxious odours and in particular, the large fire that occurred last week which produced a lot of polluted smoke for a distance of six miles. Some people reckoned that the s
mell of burning tyres could be smelt here in Gilgarran. There have been numerous fires on these sites over the last few years. These fires give rise to compaliant by people like us, but more so from the nearer village of Distington (1\'be
 miles west of here). 
The councillor suggests that there could be more incidents of cancer cases in this area in coming years along with respiratory troubles as well as some cases of bronchitis related problems. He himself has recently suddenly started sinusitis, which he hasn
\rquote t had before. All in all, he wasn\rquote t happy about the situation on both sites. We don\rquote 
t know what is being tipped there, all we can do as a community is accept what we are being told by the site owners. As previously stated, animal carcasses were being tipped and buried for about three days before we were told officially that this was so.

\par Incidentally, the site where animals are buried is owned by Cumbria County Council. This seems to be totally against the advice of County Council officials who look after the environment and the health of the population. As I\rquote 
ve written before, there are going to be bigger concerns if the opencast coal site to the south of the village becomes a landfill site for refuse from parts of the county fifty miles away. At the moment 
there are no suggestions that anything from the FMD outbreak will be dumped there. Having said that, however, we as villagers didn\rquote 
t know of carcasses being buried or pyre ash being tipped until after it had happened. We await the outcome of this coal site
 with some trepidation, after all, no coal has come from this site for some months. It has all the indication of becoming a land fill site.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 6
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Monday to Wednesday, if work is still ongoing at the burial site it is not visible from our side of the site. I still don\rquote 
t know what is going on there. It may all be innocent and an improvement to the environment, after all, this is what the site owners have to do.
\par Thursday
\par A delegation of MEPs visit the north of the county. They have come to assess the situat
ion for themselves and to report back to the European Parliament. No doubt they will also report back to their own constituents in their own countries. The delegation visit the auction mart at Longtown where the disease was first noticed in this country a
nd also visited the big burial site at Great Orton where it was estimated that half a million carcasses were buried. Good coverage by the local press, radio and T.V. gave anyone interested the views of the delegation.
\par Thursday \endash  Saturday
\par The MEP delegation agreed that the FMD situation had been disastrous (we all know that!). Comments from some tourist and agriculture observers ranged from a \lquote waste of time\rquote  to \lquote 
at least some politicians have bothered to visit us, our own couldn\rquote t do that\rquote  Personally, I think
 that some good came out of this, particularly when it was reported that the Dutch had used vaccination techniques when they had a small outbreak.
\par Many people think that the British Government should have had a public inquiry into the outbreak. What have they to hide? Cumbria is holding its own inquiry \endash 
 quite rightly so, other organisations such as Lancaster University are holding research into the outbreak. Why not the Government? Eventually we will know why, perhaps not in my lifetime though. The minister and MAFF have a lot to answer for.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 7
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Thought it would be of interest to include copies of the newsletter that the local authorities issued to every household in the area regarding the disposal of carcasses and effluent. It will be of note that the
re was a fire last year on the Alco site, also involving tyres. Very similar to last years only not as big. A report on local T.V. today stated that the recent visit of MEPs to the area considered that vaccination should have been used at the outset and b
e
 should seriously considered should a future outbreak occur. Heard of reports of an outbreak of T.B. in cattle in other parts of the country. This was reported to be more serious than FMD should a major outbreak occur. This would lead to the question of d
isposal should the need arise. As I\rquote ve already reported in previous entries, the use of the opencast coal site to the south-east of here is causing concern in some quarters. Although the site didn\rquote 
t feature in the FMD crisis, there is a feeling that it is b
eing earmarked for use in the future should the need arise or even the rumour of an incinerator is planned for there. The general feeling here and in the surrounding area is that we have had enough dumping of carcasses, effluent, toxic chemicals etc. It c
ould be that the authorities have seen that the sites concerned have handled those substances before, that an extension of disposal sites in this area would be effective.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
\par Week 8
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Nothing of any significance to report this week.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 9
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Now that Cumbria\rquote 
s FMD inquiry has started, a lot of people I have met this week recall the happenings of a year ago. Even more interesting is the coverage in the local press and T.V. Plenty of publicity by the media shows how little the Government an MAFF in particular l
e
t the farming and tourism industries of the county down. There has been plenty of distressing stories by farmers not only of infected animals being slaughtered but also the slaughtering of healthy animals in the 3 km circle of an outbreak. One particularl
y distressing point of evidence was when a farmer described to the panel the birth of a calf five days after it\rquote 
s mother had been shot! We at the time of the outbreak were hearing these stories on a daily basis and still MAFF and Mr. Brown kept telling us that the outbreak was \lquote under control\rquote 
. All I can say at this point is may heaven help us when it all happens again.
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 
\par 
\par Week 10}{\insrsid11994229 
\par Work is still going on at the burial site. It looks like new soil is being dumped on top of the actual site and \lquote dozed\rquote  to level it
 of and to smooth it out on the side. All we can do is accept that the management of the site are making it better for all concerned and that they are as concerned as we are. The much publicised Cumbrian FMD inquiry team visited the land fill site. They m
e
t local councillors who expressed their concern over this site and the Alco site. No other report was forthcoming from the team. The inquiry team finish their evidence gathering this week. One very important statement was made that the Minister of the Env
ironment should make a statement over this outbreak and should even make a visit to these sites county-wide. There has been total silence from Mrs Beckett\rquote 
s department over this request. The same silence is observed from any government source for that matter. Everyone asks the same questions, what have they got to hide? Why aren\rquote 
t they interested? What plans are being made? And what lessons have been learned from last years outbreak? A lot of farms are restocking and in this neighbourhood, farm work is going
 on as before, or so it looks. As time goes on though, there seems to be a smouldering anger that no-one in authority is as concerned as well are.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 11
\par }{\b0\insrsid11994229 Work is still on going at the burial site. No comments heard from any of the villagers or neighbours this week.
\par }{\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 12
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Monday, from my own observation work is still ongoing at the burial site. More heavy plant has been moved on to the top of the giant amount and it looks as though more topsoil is being laid over the Mount. Perhaps to improve the sit
e, but water may still permeate into and through the site. We can only believe the operators that this is a right thing to do.
\par Friday, talked to 2 it villagers about the after-effects of FMD. One said oh it's all over now and forgotten about it doesn't bot
her me one bit. The other said it all in the past we just have to forget about it. It seems that life is returning to normal in all aspects of village life, people don't think about last year unless the diarist mentions that. 
\par 
\par Sunday, a bad day or weather
 wise. This prolonged rain may halt work on the burial site. Most people are reluctant to talk about F M D now, even if it was one of the worst economic and social disasters to hit this country and this County in particular. Now that it is over, people's 
memories begin to fade. However, some of us are not happy at having these two disposal sites within a 1000 metres of this village. FMD may be over but these burial sites are here for a long time yet.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Diary 13}{\insrsid11994229 \line Observed in work on burial site. More heavy machinery and plant moved in and large quantities of soil are being laid down and smoothed out.\line 
\par \line }{\b\insrsid11994229 Diary 14}{\insrsid11994229 \line Talked to some religious today about the after-effects of FMD. Without exception, they are not interested! It's all over with an idle one to be reminde
d about it are the general comments. Nobody seems bothered that there are hundreds of animals buried a 1000 yards from his village or the fact that there is leachate and pyre ash buried in another site. Looking at the burial site and the work that is goin
g on there, it does look as though the management there are doing everything to make the site safe.
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 
\par 
\par Diary 15\line }{\insrsid11994229 I met a smallholder today to whom I have talked to in the past about the effects and after-effects of FMD. He still not happy about the burial sit
e despite the landscaping and smoothing off of the large quantities of topsoil, only time will tell he says. He does not have any stock near to the site but he has sheep on the farmer's land. Since FMD finished though his stock movements are still restric
t
ed by new legislation that has come in since the area was declared free. For instance, or if he takes a sheep to auction, he asked to have nine pieces of paper for this transaction. If the price is not right and he has to take the she back to his land he 
w
as put them back in the same field that they came from and it cannot move them to three weeks. He then has to obtain a licence to do this. He does think that the authorities are not going to be as strict shortly. This is just one of the precautions that h
ave come in to try and combat any recurrence of FMD.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5315}Diary{\*\bkmkend _VV5315} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5317M}16{\*\bkmkend _VV5317M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5322}I{\*\bkmkend _VV5322} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5323}met
{\*\bkmkend _VV5323} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5324}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5324} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5325}smallholder{\*\bkmkend _VV5325} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5326}who{\*\bkmkend _VV5326} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5327}rents{\*\bkmkend _VV5327} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5328}land
{\*\bkmkend _VV5328} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5329}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5329} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5330}from{\*\bkmkend _VV5330} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5331}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5331} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5332}farmer{\*\bkmkend _VV5332} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5333}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5333} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5334}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5334} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5350}village{\*\bkmkstart _VV5351M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5350}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5351M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5353}His{\*\bkmkend _VV5353} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5354}income{\*\bkmkend _VV5354} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5374}from{\*\bkmkend _VV5374} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5391}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5391} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5394}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV5394} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5396}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5396} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5397}he{\*\bkmkend _VV5397} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5398}
a{\*\bkmkend _VV5398} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5399}breeds{\*\bkmkend _VV5399} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5400}has{\*\bkmkend _VV5400} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5401}been{\*\bkmkend _VV5401} nil, {\*\bkmkstart _VV5417}like{\*\bkmkend _VV5417} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5418}many
{\*\bkmkend _VV5418} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5419}more{\*\bkmkend _VV5419} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5420}people{\*\bkmkend _VV5420} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5421}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5421} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5422}similar{\*\bkmkend _VV5422} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5423}circumstances
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5424M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5423}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5424M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5425}Fortunately{\*\bkmkend _VV5425} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5426}for{\*\bkmkend _VV5426} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5427}him{\*\bkmkend _VV5427} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5428}had
{\*\bkmkend _VV5428} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5429}he{\*\bkmkend _VV5429} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5430}has{\*\bkmkend _VV5430} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5431}an{\*\bkmkend _VV5431} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5432}income{\*\bkmkend _VV5432} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5433}from{\*\bkmkend _VV5433} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5434}another{\*\bkmkend _VV5434} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5435}source{\*\bkmkstart _VV5436M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5435}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5436M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5437}The{\*\bkmkend _VV5437} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5438}subject{\*\bkmkend _VV5438} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5440M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5440M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5441}compensation{\*\bkmkend _VV5441} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5442}came{\*\bkmkend _VV5442} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5443}up{\*\bkmkend _VV5443} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5444}during{\*\bkmkend _VV5444} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5445}our{\*\bkmkend _VV5445} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5446}conversation{\*\bkmkstart _VV5447M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5446}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5447M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5448}I{\*\bkmkend _VV5448} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5449}personally{\*\bkmkend _VV5449} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5450}do{\*\bkmkend _VV5450} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5451}not{\*\bkmkend _VV5451} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5452}have{\*\bkmkend _VV5452} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5453}any{\*\bkmkend _VV5453} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5454}comment{\*\bkmkend _VV5454} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5455
}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5455} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5456}make{\*\bkmkend _VV5456} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5457}about{\*\bkmkend _VV5457} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5458}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5458} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5459}item{\*\bkmkend _VV5459} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5460}as
{\*\bkmkend _VV5460} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5461}it{\*\bkmkend _VV5461} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5462}maybe{\*\bkmkend _VV5462} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5463}just{\*\bkmkend _VV5463} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5464}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5464} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5465}rumour{\*\bkmkstart _VV5466M
}{\*\bkmkend _VV5465},{\*\bkmkend _VV5466M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5467}apparently{\*\bkmkend _VV5467} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5468}he{\*\bkmkend _VV5468} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5469}got{\*\bkmkend _VV5469} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5470}it{\*\bkmkend _VV5470} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5471}
b{\*\bkmkend _VV5471}ee {\*\bkmkstart _VV5472}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5472} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5473}his{\*\bkmkend _VV5473} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5474}bonnet{\*\bkmkend _VV5474} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5475}about{\*\bkmkend _VV5475} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5476}compensation
{\*\bkmkend _VV5476} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5477}paid{\*\bkmkend _VV5477} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5478}out{\*\bkmkend _VV5478} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5479}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5479} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5480}people{\*\bkmkend _VV5480} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5481}who{\*\bkmkend _VV5481} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5482}were{\*\bkmkend _VV5482} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5483}not{\*\bkmkend _VV5483} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5484}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5484} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5485}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5485} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5489}agricultural{\*\bkmkend _VV5489} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5490}business{\*\bkmkstart _VV5491M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5490}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5491M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5492}What{\*\bkmkend _VV5492} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5493}seemed{\*\bkmkend _VV5493} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5494}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5494} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5495}upset{\*\bkmkend _VV5495} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5496}him{\*\bkmkend _VV5496} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5497}was{\*\bkmkend _VV5497} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5498}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5498} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5499}he{\*\bkmkend _VV5499} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5500}
had{\*\bkmkend _VV5500} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5501}heard{\*\bkmkend _VV5501} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5502}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5502} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5503}some{\*\bkmkend _VV5503} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5504}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5504} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5505}fish
{\*\bkmkend _VV5505} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5506}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5506} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5507}chip{\*\bkmkend _VV5507} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5508}shop{\*\bkmkend _VV5508} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5509}owner{\*\bkmkend _VV5509} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5510}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5510} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5511}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5511} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5512}Lake{\*\bkmkend _VV5512} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5513}District{\*\bkmkend _VV5513} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5514}had{\*\bkmkend _VV5514} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5515}been{\*\bkmkend _VV5515} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5516}paid{\*\bkmkend _VV5516} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5522M}\'a3170{\*\bkmkend _VV5522M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5523}per{\*\bkmkend _VV5523} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5524}month{\*\bkmkend _VV5524} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5525}compensation{\*\bkmkend _VV5525} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5526}for{\*\bkmkend _VV5526} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5527}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5527} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5528}loss{\*\bkmkend _VV5528} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5529}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5529} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5530}trade{\*\bkmkstart _VV5531M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5530}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV5531M} He {\*\bkmkstart _VV5539}didn't{\*\bkmkend _VV5539} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5540}mind{\*\bkmkend _VV5540} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5541}too{\*\bkmkend _VV5541} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5542}much{\*\bkmkend _VV5542} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5544}that
{\*\bkmkend _VV5544} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5545}hoteliers{\*\bkmkend _VV5545} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5547}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5547} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5549}guest{\*\bkmkend _VV5549} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5550}house{\*\bkmkend _VV5550} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5551}owners
{\*\bkmkend _VV5551} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5552}had{\*\bkmkend _VV5552} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5553}claimed{\*\bkmkend _VV5553} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5554}compensation{\*\bkmkstart _VV5555M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5554},{\*\bkmkend _VV5555M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5556}but
{\*\bkmkend _VV5556} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5557}wondered{\*\bkmkend _VV5557} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5558}where{\*\bkmkend _VV5558} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5559}else{\*\bkmkend _VV5559} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5560}would{\*\bkmkend _VV5560} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5561}this
{\*\bkmkend _VV5561} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5562}kind{\*\bkmkend _VV5562} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5563}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5563} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5564}money{\*\bkmkend _VV5564} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5565}go{\*\bkmkend _VV5565} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5566}when{\*\bkmkend _VV5566} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5567}he{\*\bkmkend _VV5567} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5568}himself{\*\bkmkend _VV5568} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5569}had{\*\bkmkend _VV5569} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5570}been{\*\bkmkend _VV5570} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5571}paid{\*\bkmkend _VV5571} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5572}nothing{\*\bkmkstart _VV5573M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5572}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5573M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5574}This{\*\bkmkend _VV5574} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5575}is{\*\bkmkend _VV5575} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5576}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5576} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5578M
}first{\*\bkmkend _VV5578M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5579}time{\*\bkmkend _VV5579} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5580}I've{\*\bkmkend _VV5580} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5581}heard{\*\bkmkend _VV5581} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5582}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5582} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5584M}one
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5585M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5584M}!{\*\bkmkend _VV5585M}
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5586}Diar{\*\bkmkend _VV5586}y 17
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5588}Attended{\*\bkmkend _VV5588} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5589}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV5589} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5590}Cumberland{\*\bkmkend _VV5590} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5591}Show{\*\bkmkend _VV5591} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5592}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5592} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5593}every{\*\bkmkend _VV5593} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5594}to
{\*\bkmkend _VV5594} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5595}be{\*\bkmkend _VV5595} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5596}park{\*\bkmkend _VV5596} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5597}Carlisle{\*\bkmkstart _VV5598M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5597}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5598M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5599}We{\*\bkmkstart _VV5600M
}{\*\bkmkend _VV5599},{\*\bkmkend _VV5600M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5601}as{\*\bkmkend _VV5601} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5602}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5602} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5603}family{\*\bkmkend _VV5603} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5604}used{\*\bkmkend _VV5604} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5605}to
{\*\bkmkend _VV5605} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5606}attend{\*\bkmkend _VV5606} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5607}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5607} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5608}annual{\*\bkmkend _VV5608} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5609}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5609} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5610}regularly
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5611M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5610},{\*\bkmkend _VV5611M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5612}both{\*\bkmkend _VV5612} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5613}as{\*\bkmkend _VV5613} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5614}spectators{\*\bkmkend _VV5614} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5615}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5615
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5616}competitors{\*\bkmkstart _VV5617M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5616}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5617M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5618}We{\*\bkmkend _VV5618} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5619}have{\*\bkmkend _VV5619} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5620}never{\*\bkmkend _VV5620} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5621}seen{\*\bkmkend _VV5621} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5622}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5622} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5623}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5623} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5624}like{\*\bkmkend _VV5624} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5625}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5625} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5627M
}one{\*\bkmkend _VV5627M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5628}put{\*\bkmkend _VV5628} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5629}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5629} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5630}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5630} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5631}year{\*\bkmkstart _VV5632M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5631},{\*\bkmkend _VV5632M}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5633}when{\*\bkmkend _VV5633} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5634}will{\*\bkmkend _VV5634} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5635}things{\*\bkmkend _VV5635} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5636}really{\*\bkmkend _VV5636} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5637}get{\*\bkmkend _VV5637} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5638}back{\*\bkmkend _VV5638} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5639}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5639} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5640}normal{\*\bkmkstart _VV5641M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5640}?{\*\bkmkend _VV5641M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5642}Many{\*\bkmkend _VV5642} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5643}
of{\*\bkmkend _VV5643} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5644}us{\*\bkmkend _VV5644} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5647}think{\*\bkmkend _VV5647} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5648}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5648} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5649}agriculture{\*\bkmkend _VV5649} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5650}is
{\*\bkmkend _VV5650} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5651}back{\*\bkmkend _VV5651} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5652}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5652} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5653M}pre-{\*\bkmkstart _VV5654}{\*\bkmkend _VV5653M}FMD{\*\bkmkstart _VV5655M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5654}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5655M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5656}Cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV5656} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5657}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5657} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5658}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV5658} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5659}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5659} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5660}grazing{\*\bkmkend _VV5660} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5661}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5661} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5662}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5662} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5663}fields{\*\bkmkstart _VV5664M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5663},{\*\bkmkend _VV5664M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5665}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV5665} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5666}has{\*\bkmkend _VV5666} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5667}reached{\*\bkmkend _VV5667} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5668}new{\*\bkmkend _VV5668} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5669}heights{\*\bkmkend _VV5669} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5670}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5670} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5671}produce{\*\bkmkend _VV5671} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5672}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5672} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5673}some{\*\bkmkend _VV5673} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5674}farms{\*\bkmkstart _VV5675M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5674}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5675M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5676}Calves{\*\bkmkend _VV5676} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5677}are{\*\bkmkend _VV5677} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5678}being{\*\bkmkend _VV5678} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5679}born{\*\bkmkstart _VV5680M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5679},{\*\bkmkend _VV5680M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5681}silage{\*\bkmkend _VV5681} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5682}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5682} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5683}haymaking{\*\bkmkend _VV5683} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5684}is{\*\bkmkend _VV5684} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5685}progressing{\*\bkmkend _VV5685} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5686}when{\*\bkmkend _VV5686} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5687}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5687} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5688}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV5688} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5689}permits{\*\bkmkstart _VV5690M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5689}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5690M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5691}But{\*\bkmkend _VV5691} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5692}there{\*\bkmkend _VV5692} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5693}are{\*\bkmkend _VV5693} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5694}still{\*\bkmkend _VV5694} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5695}restrictions{\*\bkmkend _VV5695} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5696}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5696} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5697}animal{\*\bkmkend _VV5697} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5698}movements{\*\bkmkstart _VV5699M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5698}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5699M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5700}Hence{\*\bkmkstart _VV5701M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV5700},{\*\bkmkend _VV5701M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5702}no{\*\bkmkend _VV5702} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5703}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV5703} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5704}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV5704} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5705}or{\*\bkmkend _VV5705} pigs 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5713}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5713} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5714}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5714} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5715}year's{\*\bkmkend _VV5715} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5716}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5716} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5717}only{\*\bkmkend _VV5717} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5718}horses{\*\bkmkstart _VV5719M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5718},{\*\bkmkend _VV5719M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5720}poultry{\*\bkmkstart _VV5721M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5720},{\*\bkmkend _VV5721M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5722}dogs{\*\bkmkend _VV5722} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5723}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5723} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5724}rabbits{\*\bkmkstart _VV5725M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5724}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5725M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5726}Not{\*\bkmkend _VV5726} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5727}many{\*\bkmkend _VV5727} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5728
}pieces{\*\bkmkend _VV5728} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5729}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5729} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5730}agricultural{\*\bkmkend _VV5730} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5731}machinery{\*\bkmkend _VV5731} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5732}onshore{\*\bkmkend _VV5732} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5733}
either{\*\bkmkstart _VV5734M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5733}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5734M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5735}Plenty{\*\bkmkend _VV5735} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5736}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5736} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5737}Chartered{\*\bkmkend _VV5737} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5738}Accountants
{\*\bkmkend _VV5738} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5739}tents{\*\bkmkstart _VV5740M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5739},{\*\bkmkend _VV5740M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5741}craft{\*\bkmkend _VV5741} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5742}tents{\*\bkmkstart _VV5743M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5742},{\*\bkmkend _VV5743M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5744}Horse{\*\bkmkend _VV5744} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5745}feeds{\*\bkmkend _VV5745} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5746}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5746} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5747}{\*\bkmkstart _VV5786}tack{\*\bkmkstart _VV5748M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5747},{\*\bkmkend _VV5748M}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5749}displays{\*\bkmkend _VV5749} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5750}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5750} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5751}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5751} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5752}main{\*\bkmkend _VV5752} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5753}arena{\*\bkmkend _VV5753} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5754}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5754} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5755}bands{\*\bkmkstart _VV5756M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5755}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5756M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5757}Not{\*\bkmkend _VV5757} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5758}an{\*\bkmkend _VV5758} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5766}
agricultural{\*\bkmkend _VV5766} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5767}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5767} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5768}as{\*\bkmkend _VV5768} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5769}we{\*\bkmkend _VV5769} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5770}knew{\*\bkmkend _VV5770} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5771}it
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5772M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5771}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5772M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5773}It{\*\bkmkend _VV5773} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5774}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV5774} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5775}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5775} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5776}be{\*\bkmkend _VV5776} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5777}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5777} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5778}same{\*\bkmkend _VV5778} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5779}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5779} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5780}other{\*\bkmkend _VV5780} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5781}shows{\*\bkmkstart _VV5782M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5781
},{\*\bkmkend _VV5782M} Ennerdale{\*\bkmkend _VV5786} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5787}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5787} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5788}is{\*\bkmkend _VV5788} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5790M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV5790M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5791}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5791} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5792}our{\*\bkmkend _VV5792} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5793}local{\*\bkmkend _VV5793} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5794}shows{\*\bkmkstart _VV5795M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5794}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5795M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5796}This{\*\bkmkend _VV5796} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5797
}year{\*\bkmkend _VV5797} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5799}there{\*\bkmkend _VV5799} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5800}isn't{\*\bkmkend _VV5800} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5801}going{\*\bkmkend _VV5801} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5802}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5802} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5803}be
{\*\bkmkend _VV5803} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5804}any{\*\bkmkend _VV5804} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5805}hors{\*\bkmkend _VV5805}es {\*\bkmkstart _VV5807}or{\*\bkmkend _VV5807} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5808}she{\*\bkmkend _VV5808}ep. Generally {\*\bkmkstart _VV5812}there
{\*\bkmkend _VV5812} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5813}are{\*\bkmkend _VV5813} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5814}no{\*\bkmkend _VV5814} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5815}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV5815} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5816}shown{\*\bkmkend _VV5816} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5817}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5817} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5818}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5818} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5819}show{\*\bkmkstart _VV5820M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5819},{\*\bkmkend _VV5820M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5821}but{\*\bkmkend _VV5821} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5822}without{\*\bkmkend _VV5822} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5825
}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV5825} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5830M}({\*\bkmkstart _VV5831}{\*\bkmkend _VV5830M}hill{\*\bkmkend _VV5831} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5832}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV5832} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5833}dominate{\*\bkmkend _VV5833} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5834}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV5834} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5835}show{\*\bkmkstart _VV5836M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5835}){\*\bkmkend _VV5836M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5839}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5839} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5840}there{\*\bkmkend _VV5840} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5841}isn't{\*\bkmkend _VV5841} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5842}going{\*\bkmkend _VV5842} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5843}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5843} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5844}be{\*\bkmkend _VV5844} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5845}much{\*\bkmkend _VV5845} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5846}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5846} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5847}
show{\*\bkmkend _VV5847} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5848}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5848} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5849}all{\*\bkmkstart _VV5850M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5849}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5850M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5851}It{\*\bkmkend _VV5851} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5852}was{\*\bkmkend _VV5852} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5853}always{\*\bkmkend _VV5853} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5854}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5854} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5855}good{\*\bkmkend _VV5855} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5856}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5856} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5857}for{\*\bkmkend _VV5857} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5858}
equestrian{\*\bkmkend _VV5858} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5859}events{\*\bkmkend _VV5859} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5860}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5860} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5861}many{\*\bkmkend _VV5861} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5862}levels{\*\bkmkstart _VV5863M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5862}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV5863M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5864}This{\*\bkmkend _VV5864} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5865}show{\*\bkmkend _VV5865} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5866}was{\*\bkmkend _VV5866} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5867}always{\*\bkmkend _VV5867} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5868}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5868}
 mu{\*\bkmkstart _VV5869}st{\*\bkmkend _VV5869} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5870}for{\*\bkmkend _VV5870} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5871}our{\*\bkmkend _VV5871} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5872}family{\*\bkmkstart _VV5873M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5872}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5873M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5874
}I{\*\bkmkend _VV5874} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5875}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV5875} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5876}think{\*\bkmkend _VV5876} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5877}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5877} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5878}we{\*\bkmkend _VV5878} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5879}will
{\*\bkmkend _VV5879} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5880}be{\*\bkmkend _VV5880} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5881}going{\*\bkmkend _VV5881} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5882}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5882} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5883}year{\*\bkmkstart _VV5884M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5883}.{\*\bkmkstart _VV5885M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV5884M}
\par {\*\bkmkend _VV5885M}
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 18
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 From the golf course {\*\bkmkstart _VV5887}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5887} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5888}golf{\*\bkmkend _VV5888} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5889}driving{\*\bkmkend _VV5889} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5890}range{\*\bkmkend _VV5890} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5891}I{\*\bkmkend _VV5891} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5892}can{\*\bkmkend _VV5892} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5893}look{\*\bkmkend _VV5893} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5894}out{\*\bkmkend _VV5894} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5895}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5895} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5896}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5896} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5897}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5897} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5898}
western{\*\bkmkend _VV5898} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5899}side{\*\bkmkend _VV5899} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5900}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5900} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5901}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5901} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5902}burial{\*\bkmkend _VV5902} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5903}site
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5904M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5903}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5904M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5905}I{\*\bkmkend _VV5905} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5906}have{\*\bkmkend _VV5906} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5907}written{\*\bkmkend _VV5907} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5908}in{\*\bkmkend _VV5908} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5909}previous{\*\bkmkend _VV5909} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5910}weeks{\*\bkmkend _VV5910} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5911}about{\*\bkmkend _VV5911} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5912}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5912} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5913}work{\*\bkmkend _VV5913} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5914}there{\*\bkmkend _VV5914} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5915}has{\*\bkmkend _VV5915} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5916}been{\*\bkmkstart _VV5955}{\*\bkmkend _VV5916} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5917}going{\*\bkmkend _VV5917} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5918}on{\*\bkmkend _VV5918}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV5919}at{\*\bkmkend _VV5919} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5920}this{\*\bkmkend _VV5920} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5921}site{\*\bkmkstart _VV5922M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5921}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5922M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5931}Viewing{\*\bkmkend _VV5931} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5932}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5932} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5933}site{\*\bkmkend _VV5933} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5934}are{\*\bkmkend _VV5934} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5935}f{\*\bkmkend _VV5935}rom our {\*\bkmkstart _VV5937}village{\*\bkmkend _VV5937} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5938}side{\*\bkmkstart _VV5940M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5938},{\*\bkmkend _VV5940M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5942}would{\*\bkmkend _VV5942} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5943}hardly{\*\bkmkend _VV5943} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5944}know{\*\bkmkend _VV5944} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5945}what{\*\bkmkend _VV5945} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5946}that{\*\bkmkend _VV5946} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5947}there{\*\bkmkend _VV5947} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5948}ever{\*\bkmkend _VV5948} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5949}was{\*\bkmkend _VV5949} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5950}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5950} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5951}burial{\*\bkmkend _VV5951} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5952}site{\*\bkmkstart _VV5953M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5952}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5953M} Hundreds{\*\bkmkend _VV5955} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5956}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV5956} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5957}tons{\*\bkmkend _VV5957} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5958}of{\*\bkmkend _VV5958} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5959}topsoil{\*\bkmkend _VV5959} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5960}had{\*\bkmkend _VV5960} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5961}been{\*\bkmkend _VV5961}
 laid {\*\bkmkstart _VV5963}and{\*\bkmkend _VV5963} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5964}smooth{\*\bkmkend _VV5964}ed {\*\bkmkstart _VV5965}out{\*\bkmkend _VV5965} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5966}to{\*\bkmkend _VV5966} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5967}make{\*\bkmkend _VV5967} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV5968}more-or-less{\*\bkmkend _VV5968} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5969}like{\*\bkmkend _VV5969} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5970}a{\*\bkmkend _VV5970} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5971}landscaped{\*\bkmkend _VV5971} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5972}feature{\*\bkmkstart _VV5973M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV5972}.{\*\bkmkend _VV5973M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5974}It{\*\bkmkend _VV5974} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5975}looks{\*\bkmkend _VV5975} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5976}really{\*\bkmkend _VV5976} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5977}good{\*\bkmkstart _VV5979M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5977}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV5979M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5983}From{\*\bkmkend _VV5983} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5985}the{\*\bkmkend _VV5985} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5986}western{\*\bkmkend _VV5986} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5987}side{\*\bkmkend _VV5987} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5988}though
{\*\bkmkend _VV5988}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV5989}things{\*\bkmkend _VV5989} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5990}are{\*\bkmkend _VV5990} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5991}little{\*\bkmkend _VV5991} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5992}different{\*\bkmkstart _VV5993M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5992}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV5993M} W{\*\bkmkstart _VV5996}ork{\*\bkmkend _VV5996} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5997}is{\*\bkmkend _VV5997} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5998}still{\*\bkmkend _VV5998} {\*\bkmkstart _VV5999}going{\*\bkmkend _VV5999} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6000}on{\*\bkmkend _VV6000} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6001}there{\*\bkmkstart _VV6002M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6001},{\*\bkmkend _VV6002M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6003}large{\*\bkmkend _VV6003} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6004}amounts{\*\bkmkend _VV6004} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6005}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6005} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6006}soil{\*\bkmkend _VV6006} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6007}have{\*\bkmkend _VV6007} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6008}been{\*\bkmkend _VV6008} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6009}tipped{\*\bkmkend _VV6009} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6010}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6010} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6012}levelled{\*\bkmkend _VV6012} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6013}off{\*\bkmkstart _VV6014M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6013}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6014M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6015}There{\*\bkmkend _VV6015} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6016}are{\*\bkmkend _VV6016} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6017}still{\*\bkmkend _VV6017} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6018}Portakabin{\*\bkmkend _VV6018}s there {\*\bkmkstart _VV6022M}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6022M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6023}heavy{\*\bkmkend _VV6023} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6024}plant{\*\bkmkend _VV6024} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6025}can{\*\bkmkend _VV6025} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6026}still{\*\bkmkend _VV6026} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6027}be{\*\bkmkend _VV6027} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6028}seen{\*\bkmkend _VV6028} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6029}moving{\*\bkmkend _VV6029} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6030}about{\*\bkmkstart _VV6031M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6030}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6031M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6032}No{\*\bkmkend _VV6032} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6033}doubt{\*\bkmkend _VV6033} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6034}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6034} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6035}
western{\*\bkmkend _VV6035} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6036}side{\*\bkmkend _VV6036} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6037}well{\*\bkmkend _VV6037} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6038}look{\*\bkmkend _VV6038} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6039}as{\*\bkmkend _VV6039} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6040}good
{\*\bkmkend _VV6040} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6041}as{\*\bkmkend _VV6041} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6042}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6042} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6043}eastern{\*\bkmkend _VV6043} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6044}side{\*\bkmkend _VV6044} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6045}before
{\*\bkmkend _VV6045} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6046}long{\*\bkmkend _VV6046}.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 19
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV6047}It{\*\bkmkend _VV6047} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6048}is
{\*\bkmkend _VV6048} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6049}announced{\*\bkmkend _VV6049} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6050}that{\*\bkmkend _VV6050} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6051}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6051} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6052}Prime{\*\bkmkend _VV6052} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6053}Minister
{\*\bkmkend _VV6053} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6054}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6054} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6055}his{\*\bkmkend _VV6055} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6056}wife{\*\bkmkend _VV6056} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6057}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6057} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6058}son{\*\bkmkend _VV6058} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6059}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6059} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6060}his{\*\bkmkend _VV6060} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6061}family{\*\bkmkend _VV6061} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6062}at{\*\bkmkend _VV6062} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6063}a{\*\bkmkend _VV6063} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6064}
visit{\*\bkmkend _VV6064} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6065}to{\*\bkmkend _VV6065} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6066}Cumbria{\*\bkmkend _VV6066}. The {\*\bkmkstart _VV6068}P{\*\bkmkstart _VV6069}{\*\bkmkend _VV6068}M{\*\bkmkend _VV6069} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6070}arrives
{\*\bkmkend _VV6070} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6071}in{\*\bkmkend _VV6071} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6072}West{\*\bkmkend _VV6072} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6073}Cumbria{\*\bkmkstart _VV6074M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6073},{\*\bkmkend _VV6074M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6075}all{\*\bkmkend _VV6075} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6076}kinds{\*\bkmkend _VV6076} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6077}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6077} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6078}reports{\*\bkmkend _VV6078} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6079}are{\*\bkmkend _VV6079} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6080}written{\*\bkmkend _VV6080} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6081}in{\*\bkmkend _VV6081} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6082}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6082} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6083}local{\*\bkmkend _VV6083} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6084}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6084} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6085}national{\*\bkmkend _VV6085} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6086}press{\*\bkmkend _VV6086} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6087}about{\*\bkmkend _VV6087} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6088}what{\*\bkmkend _VV6088} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6089}he{\*\bkmkend _VV6089} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6090}is{\*\bkmkend _VV6090} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6091}
going{\*\bkmkend _VV6091} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6092}to{\*\bkmkend _VV6092} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6093}do{\*\bkmkend _VV6093} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6094}or{\*\bkmkend _VV6094} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6095}not{\*\bkmkend _VV6095} do {\*\bkmkstart _VV6096}or{\*\bkmkend _VV6096} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6097}what{\*\bkmkend _VV6097} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6098}he{\*\bkmkend _VV6098} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6099}should{\*\bkmkend _VV6099} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6100}be{\*\bkmkend _VV6100} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6101}doing{\*\bkmkstart _VV6102M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6101
}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6102M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6103}After{\*\bkmkstart _VV6104}{\*\bkmkend _VV6103} all{\*\bkmkstart _VV6105M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6104},{\*\bkmkend _VV6105M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6106}he{\*\bkmkend _VV6106} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6107}is{\*\bkmkend _VV6107} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6108}on{\*\bkmkend _VV6108} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6109}holiday{\*\bkmkstart _VV6110M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6109}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6110M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6111}The{\*\bkmkend _VV6111} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6112}PM{\*\bkmkend _VV6112} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6114}
did{\*\bkmkend _VV6114} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6115}meet{\*\bkmkend _VV6115} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6116}some{\*\bkmkend _VV6116} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6117}farmers'{\*\bkmkend _VV6117} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6118}leaders{\*\bkmkstart _VV6119M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6118},
{\*\bkmkend _VV6119M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6120}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6120} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6121}press{\*\bkmkend _VV6121} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6122}as{\*\bkmkend _VV6122} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6123}usual{\*\bkmkend _VV6123} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6124}stirred
{\*\bkmkend _VV6124} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6125}things{\*\bkmkend _VV6125} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6126}up{\*\bkmkend _VV6126} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6127}or{\*\bkmkend _VV6127} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6128}as{\*\bkmkend _VV6128} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6129}to{\*\bkmkend _VV6129} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6130}where{\*\bkmkend _VV6130} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6131}he{\*\bkmkend _VV6131} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6132}should{\*\bkmkend _VV6132} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6133}be{\*\bkmkend _VV6133} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6134}meeting{\*\bkmkstart _VV6135M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV6134}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6135M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6136}Tourism{\*\bkmkend _VV6136} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6137}officials{\*\bkmkend _VV6137} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6138}say{\*\bkmkend _VV6138} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6139}that{\*\bkmkend _VV6139} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6140}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6140} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6141}trip{\*\bkmkend _VV6141} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6142}was{\*\bkmkend _VV6142} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6143}fantastic{\*\bkmkend _VV6143} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6144}for{\*\bkmkend _VV6144} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6145}tourism{\*\bkmkend _VV6145} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6146}in{\*\bkmkend _VV6146} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6147}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6147} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6148}county{\*\bkmkstart _VV6149M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6148}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6149M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6150}Or{\*\bkmkend _VV6150} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6151}person{\*\bkmkend _VV6151} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6152}they{\*\bkmkend _VV6152} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6153}I{\*\bkmkend _VV6153} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6154}can't{\*\bkmkend _VV6154} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6155}
see{\*\bkmkend _VV6155} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6156}what{\*\bkmkend _VV6156} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6157}difference{\*\bkmkend _VV6157} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6158}it{\*\bkmkend _VV6158} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6159}made{\*\bkmkstart _VV6160M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6159}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV6160M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6161}If{\*\bkmkend _VV6161} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6162}people{\*\bkmkend _VV6162} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6163}want{\*\bkmkend _VV6163} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6164}to{\*\bkmkend _VV6164} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6165}come{\*\bkmkend _VV6165} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6166}Cumbria{\*\bkmkstart _VV6167M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6166},{\*\bkmkend _VV6167M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6168}they{\*\bkmkend _VV6168} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6169}will{\*\bkmkend _VV6169} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6170}come{\*\bkmkend _VV6170} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6171}irrespective{\*\bkmkend _VV6171} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6172}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6172} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6173}whether{\*\bkmkend _VV6173} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6174}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6174} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6175}PM{\*\bkmkend _VV6175} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6176}comes{\*\bkmkend _VV6176} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6177}o{\*\bkmkend _VV6177}r not.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkstart _VV6179}Diary{\*\bkmkend _VV6179} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6181M}20{\*\bkmkstart _VV6182M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6181M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 {\*\bkmkend _VV6182M}After {\*\bkmkstart _VV6185}a{\*\bkmkend _VV6185} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6186}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV6186} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6187}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6187} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6188}protests{\*\bkmkend _VV6188} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6189}it{\*\bkmkend _VV6189} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6190}looks{\*\bkmkend _VV6190} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6191}as{\*\bkmkend _VV6191} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6192}though{\*\bkmkend _VV6192} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6193}it{\*\bkmkend _VV6193} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6196M}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6196M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6197M}20{\*\bkmkend _VV6197M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6198
}day{\*\bkmkend _VV6198} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6199}restriction{\*\bkmkend _VV6199} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6200}on{\*\bkmkend _VV6200} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6201}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV6201} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6202}Movement{\*\bkmkend _VV6202} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6203}will
{\*\bkmkend _VV6203} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6204}be{\*\bkmkend _VV6204} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6205}lifted{\*\bkmkstart _VV6206M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6205}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6206M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6207}Perhaps{\*\bkmkend _VV6207} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6208}this{\*\bkmkend _VV6208
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6209}will{\*\bkmkend _VV6209} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6210}now{\*\bkmkend _VV6210} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6211}mean{\*\bkmkend _VV6211} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6212}that{\*\bkmkend _VV6212} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6213}they{\*\bkmkend _VV6213} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6214}could{\*\bkmkend _VV6214} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6215}be{\*\bkmkend _VV6215} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6216}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV6216} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6217}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6217} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6218}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV6218} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6219}entries{\*\bkmkend _VV6219} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6220}at{\*\bkmkend _VV6220} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6221}local{\*\bkmkend _VV6221} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6222}agricultural{\*\bkmkend _VV6222} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6223}shows{\*\bkmkstart _VV6224M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV6223}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6224M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6225}So{\*\bkmkend _VV6225}me {\*\bkmkstart _VV6247}show{\*\bkmkend _VV6247}s {\*\bkmkstart _VV6249}are{\*\bkmkend _VV6249} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6250}going{\*\bkmkend _VV6250} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6251}
ahead{\*\bkmkend _VV6251} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6252}with{\*\bkmkend _VV6252} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6253}very{\*\bkmkend _VV6253} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6254}limited{\*\bkmkend _VV6254} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6255}entries{\*\bkmkend _VV6255} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6257}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV6257} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6259}livestock{\*\bkmkend _VV6259} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6260}and{\*\bkmkend _VV6260} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6261}some{\*\bkmkend _VV6261} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6262}with{\*\bkmkend _VV6262} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6263}no
{\*\bkmkend _VV6263} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6264}animal{\*\bkmkend _VV6264} ent{\*\bkmkstart _VV6265}ries{\*\bkmkend _VV6265} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6266}at{\*\bkmkend _VV6266} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6267}all{\*\bkmkstart _VV6268M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6267}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6268M}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV6269}These{\*\bkmkend _VV6269} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6270}shows{\*\bkmkend _VV6270} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6271}have{\*\bkmkend _VV6271} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6272}always{\*\bkmkend _VV6272} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6273}been{\*\bkmkend _VV6273} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6274}very{\*\bkmkend _VV6274} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6275}popular{\*\bkmkend _VV6275} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6276}with{\*\bkmkend _VV6276} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6277}my{\*\bkmkend _VV6277} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6278}family{\*\bkmkend _VV6278} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6279}for{\*\bkmkend _VV6279} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6280}over{\*\bkmkend _VV6280} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6282M}20{\*\bkmkend _VV6282M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6283}years{\*\bkmkstart _VV6284M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6283}.{\*\bkmkend _VV6284M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6285}
Also{\*\bkmkstart _VV6286M}{\*\bkmkend _VV6285},{\*\bkmkend _VV6286M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6287}living{\*\bkmkend _VV6287} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6288}with{\*\bkmkend _VV6288} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6289}in{\*\bkmkend _VV6289} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6290}a{\*\bkmkend _VV6290} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6291}farming{\*\bkmkend _VV6291} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6292}community{\*\bkmkend _VV6292} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6293}makes{\*\bkmkend _VV6293} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6294}us{\*\bkmkend _VV6294} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6295}feel{\*\bkmkend _VV6295} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6296}part{\*\bkmkend _VV6296} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6297}of{\*\bkmkend _VV6297} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6298}the{\*\bkmkend _VV6298} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6299}annual{\*\bkmkend _VV6299} {\*\bkmkstart _VV6300}agricultural{\*\bkmkend _VV6300} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV6301}s{\*\bkmkend _VV6301}cene.
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV5886M}{\*\bkmkend _VV5886M}
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 21
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 I\rquote 
ve written before regarding agricultural shows and the pride in which local people take in these shows. Although a lot of shows have gone ahead this season, they have had a reduced animal showing or in some cases no animals at all. Today I\rquote 
ve heard that one show has been cancelled altogether. This particular show is one of the most popular in the area. Maybe because of lack of entries or the organisers just wanted to cancel because of the 3 week restriction on animal movement. I don\rquote 
t know. Perhaps it would be better to cancel them than have a depleted show.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 22
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Spent a few hours in the fells today. It was g
ood to be able to wander the familiar paths and let our dog run free. It was a good boost to our moral and perhaps the dog\rquote s too! We all missed being able to do this last year.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 23
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Last Bank Holiday before Xmas and the last before the schools go back. At the golf course where I help out part-time during the summer we had lots of customers. A lot of them commented on how enjoyable it was to be on holiday in this area this year, compa
red to the restrictions that were in place last year. Maybe the holiday establishments are getting back to normal. There are no restrictions put on them like there is in place now with farmers and agriculture.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 26
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Sorting through the mail left whilst
 away on holiday and I came across a notice sent by the village committee notifying a Harvest Thanksgiving festival to be held next month in the village hall. As we have no church in the village, it is being held in some farm buildings in the centre of th
e village. This will be a splendid event. The farm did not have FMD but couldn\rquote t take animals from one field to another and couldn\rquote 
t market them. When we consider the gloom that settled on this farm and community, it is very welcome to have this unique even
t here in the heart of the village and the farmer and his wife will be at the centre of events. A lovely gesture and I hope it will be well supported. There will be a distribution of harvest gifts afterwards, what a change from a year ago!
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 27
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 With 
the aid of binoculars I have been able to have a closer look at the burial site from a westerly direction. There are vents in the shape of small towers to extract gas from the site. There are pipes connecting these vents. A lot of work is still going on t
here. However, all this takes place in the Western side which is the opposite side to where my village is situated. From our side there is nothing to suggest the amount of work going on. Because of this, FMD is pushed further into the backs of villager
\rquote s mi
nds. It is something in the past. It has happened, so what? People like myself who talk to farmers and agriculturalists do not easily forget these events. Personally I am still concerned about the burial site. When inquiries are made about it, all we can 
do is accept what we are told. It does not look as though every precaution is being taken to alleviate an odours or contamination. 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 28
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
I had to see the village farmer on another matter and was asked inside for coffee and a chat. He was able to tell me of the full implications of the \rquote 20 day rule\rquote 
. He accepts that this is a precaution to prevent another outbreak of FMD, but there is a lot of work involved. He told me of an isolation area that he has created and also the fencing arrangements where his 
land adjoins the neighbours land. I would say that 95% of the public don\rquote 
t know about this even if they have heard of the 20 day rule. For him (he owns the largest farm in the area) it is bad enough having to do all the physical work as regards fencing, et
c. But for anyone such as a small holder, it must be a nightmare if he has to bring animals back from market that haven\rquote t been sold. 
\par Friday, my wife and I played a round of golf at Aspatria. This course was badly restricted when FMD hit this area. We were
 reminded that there are restrictions on adjoining land. There were notices asking people who hit balls onto farm land not to cross the fence to retrieve them because of FMD precautions. This was news to us. It does make sense though. The farmer wouldn
\rquote t know where players had been walking prior to playing golf. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Diary 29
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Attended the Harvest Festival held in  the village farm, a large cattle shed had been cleaned and decorated for this event, chairs had been brought in, fruit and vegetables were on displ
ay for auctioning at the end. The place was packed! A lot of money was raised and it was a very happy event, well supported and a big boost for the farm and the village.
\par I don\rquote t think that the general public care much about FMD now that is has been a year 
since the last case was confirmed in Cumbria. The public may be reminded if they read the local newspapers intently, for instance, there was a letter to the editor published recently which referred to the results of the Cumbria Inquiry into FMD. It may ha
ve been a farmer who wrote it, I don\rquote t know, but the writer certainly went to town in the scathing comments on the handling of FMD. Even caustic remarks regarding the efforts since FMD of DEFRA and Mrs Beckett. I certainly wouldn\rquote 
t like to cross the writer, I also think the farming community must be holding it\rquote s breath in case the present restrictions such as they are, prove to be worthless. Then we will all suffer, again!
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 30
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 What a difference a year makes! Despite some restrictions on public access t
o agricultural fields in some areas of the county, it doesn\rquote 
t apply here. Although most locals confine themselves to footpaths and bridleways, other people seem to think that all fields are recreation areas. They walk and run across some of the fields in c
lose proximity to the village. Regardless of the presence of stock they exercise dogs and treat it as a some kind of park. One farmer is well know for being aggressive, he used last year\rquote s FMD outbreak to run people off his land.
\par I met a local councillor w
ho expressed concerns regarding the proposed building of an incinerator to the south of the village on the current open cast mining site. The two waste disposal sites to the west and north-west of the village have become big issues in the last 18 months d
ue to the burial of animals and the disposal of pyre ash and leachates. It seems as though we are going to get over this ghastly FMD outbreak only to have this scenario thrust upon us.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 31
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Met a small-holder who keeps sheep near to this village. He wa
s very scathing over the report that the Government and DEFRA don\rquote t want to talk up an offer from the Local Authorities here to implement findings and recommendations from their local inquiry over FMD. Why? What has this Government, who didn
\rquote t perform very well during the outbreak, got to hide and why shirk away from the findings instead of facing up to the failings that we all know about. It also seems that they don\rquote 
t want to make any safeguards and recommendations to avoid a further outbreak. As a non-agriculturalist, it doesn\rquote t surprise me in the least. After all, Government has failed other industries in the country for as long as I can remember.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 32
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 I
 am convinced that authorities in the area must think that the way animals were buried here and pyre ash and leachate were disposed of at another site nearby was all done as very successfully and that the two sites handled everything professionally. There
f
ore the sites would be more than capable of handling ash from an incinerator. To me, this is the legacy of FMD. I am most annoyed over this, together with a lot more of the villagers. This village no longer has a representative on the parish council, both
 
have resigned for whatever reason and no-one will step forward to take it one. I have said that I would take a set on the parish council to represent the village and fight for our rights and future quality of life. Due to this, I have uncovered a pile of 
claims and counter-claims. It seems that both parish and district counsellors know what is going on (regarding the incinerator) and that developers have made \lquote concessions\rquote 
 to some councillors. Also there are claims that the developers have offered money to 
local landowners and farmers so that roads can be put in. All these accusations have been strongly denied. At the same time it is rumoured that some farmers have been offered local fields nearby. Because of what I have discovered in my own investigations,
 it would seem that a lot of friendships gained over 20 years could come to an end, I am fearful of what I have uncovered. There are also claims that \lquote councillors are only in it for what there can get out and are not to be trusted.\rquote  I don
\rquote t want that said of me. Also by the time all this is sorted out, I will be 70-75,  I certainly don\rquote t want to be fighting peoples battles at that age. However, I will support any effort to stop the proposed development. 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 33
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Once again the large farm in the centre of t
he village was the venue for the annual Guy Fawkes bonfire and fireworks. Organisers had been round the village asking for donations to provide fireworks. A tractor and trailer toured the areas picking up things for the bonfire. Drinks and food were serve
d
 in a barn after the fireworks. This is another occasion when villagers and the farming community come together. It is perhaps the only time that the general public of the village think about FMD and last years events, if only briefly. The farmer remarked
 that is the third time this year that there has been a public function on his farm. The first was the jubilee party in June, then on October 6}{\super\insrsid11994229 th}{\insrsid11994229 
 the Harvest Festival service. These events keep farming in the public eye.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 34
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 I haven\rquote t written before a
bout the proposed building of an incinerator nearby to burn the counties waste. If , as we all suspect, the incinerator is built, then the odours plus the disposal of ash (to the FMD waste site) is a legacy of FMD, particularly regarding the nearby burial
 and disposal site.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 35
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
This is week 35 of this project and for most of the 35 weeks I have written that I am not confident of the future. There are numerous reasons for this. Mainly the situation in the Middle East. Today I travelled to Keswick to do
 some Xmas shopping. I was given a lift there by a neighbour who is in his 30s. He was very upset about the terrorist situation, not only was he concerned about the terror threat to the London Underground, but the threat closer to home as regards a plane 
crashing into the nearby Sellafield complex. We don\rquote t know the effect that this constant bad news has on people. People who have already got serious worries, e.g., families, housing, finance, etc must feel really depressed about it all.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 36
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Near to th
e next village is a long established farm of many acres. Recently the farm\rquote s stock of animals and machinery was sold off. The owner, who had farmed for sixty years was leaving to live with one of his brothers. He said that he wouldn\rquote 
t know how he would feel when he left the farm for the last time this weekend. The farmhouse hasn\rquote t been sold yet and now stands empty. It\rquote 
s a strange place now, where everything was hustle and bustle (they even had a B & B business there) is now derelict and bare. It\rquote s a sad reflection on the agricultural business in the wake of FMD. This farm isn\rquote 
t the only one in the area that has sold up. Some farm houses remain as dwellings, but this particular one which we saw nearly every day is just an other sad reminder of the way farming has declined in this rural area.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 39
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Tuesday.  Boarded the train  at Penrith to journey to Crewe to see our daughter.  During the journey I got into conversation with a fellow passenger.  He noticed I had got on the train at Penrith and perhaps tho
ught I was connected with the agricultural industry.  The conversation drifted into the previous years FMD outbreak.  It is rather strange, that I live in a very rural area, and , FMD is rarely mentioned now.  However, this fellow passenger (although not 
f
rom an agricultural background) gave his views on the handling of the situation.  It was no different from the views expressed by locals at the time of the crisis.  It just goes to show that FMD is very much in peoples minds even if they were not connecte
d to agriculture in any way.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 40
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Friday.  Now that the MEP have published their critical report on the FMD crisis, it is interesting to read an article published in our local weekly paper, from a reader \'85 (Article entitled \lquote Foot and Mouth Report\rquote  incl
uded). 
\par I don\rquote t have the knowledge or the data to support this readers comments.  However, I have heard plenty of stories from mainly unreliable sources, to confirm what he says.  It makes interesting reading I think.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 41
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Tuesday.  No wonder my confidence in the future has taken a big plunge over the last few months.  The situation in Iraq doesn\rquote t get any better.  Mr Tony Blair\rquote 
s message to the Armed Forces of the UK bear this out.  Being an ex-serviceman, I know what the s
ituation holds for our troops.  But, are we right to follow the USA in a war against Iraq?  No doubt Saddam Hussein does pose a threat but so does India and Pakistan to each other.  Each of these two relatively poor countries has threatened each other as 
r
egards their nuclear arsenals.  Now, the loose cannon in the form of North Korea is positioning itself as regards its position in the nuclear arms league.  Personally, I think that North Korea poses a more dangerous threat than Iraq.  It is not a very hap
py New Year for a lot of people.  Perhaps it will all be settled diplomatically.  I wonder.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 42
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Nothing of any importance to write about due to refurbishment at home.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 43
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Monday.  One of the items on the agenda for this months meeting of Disting
ton Parish Council is a report on the wood-felling and the implications of this.  As I have written in the diary before, there are strong rumours of the proposed plan to fell woods, build a new road through the felled site and bring coal from the nearby o
pencast site to link up with an existing road, then, to transport the coal to a storage area on Workington Dock.  Then, when the coal is worked out, to build an incinerator on the coal site.  Ash from this development would then be transported on the 
\lquote new\rquote  road to be disposed of on the waste disposal site that was used for FMD pyre ash and leachate.
\par Thursday.  Read a report of the aforesaid meeting.  The owners have declared that our worries are groundless.  In fact, they say that they plan to eventually ope
n the woodland to the public (the owners of the woodland are the same operators of the opencast coal site).  Footpaths will be created }{\ul\insrsid11994229 if a grant can be obtained}{\insrsid11994229 
.  A wooden wheeled ancient water mill will be restored.  After the }{\ul\insrsid11994229 closed}{\insrsid11994229  meeting the operations director of the site said that \lquote 
There has been a misunderstanding.  What we are doing will benefit local people\rquote .  He said that a management project for the wood is being followed involving felling dead trees and fresh planting.  He added: \'93The felling 
and replanting will be done this year after which it will take time to become established.  We\rquote re talking of a ten year programme but it should have long-term benefits.  I think our PR at the start of this wasn\rquote 
t very good and in the future we will let the council know of our plans\'94.  The council agreed to keep a watch on the work here in G.
\par This statement differs greatly from what some of us have been told by our village-based County Councillor.  There has never been any suggestion that the felled woods wo
uld become a land fill site, but would be felled to provide the new road.  There was nothing mentioned at the meeting regarding the proposed incinerator being built.  The County Council \'85
 that this has ever been planned.  However, our representative is adamant that this is not so.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 44
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Tuesday.  For the first time, my property has finally overcome a situation that was affected by FMD.  
\par In July 2000, the electricity supplier notified me to say that the trees in my garden had grown so tall that the topm
ost branches were in close contact with an eleven thousand volt overhead power line and that they should be felled or severely pruned.  After some further negotiations it was decided to prune to some height that I wasn\rquote 
t happy with.  Although the treetops were not actually touching the wires, it was considered a risk in the forthcoming months.  However, as time passed I couldn\rquote t wait for the foresters to arrive, so I pruned the trees myself.
\par In January 2001, the electric supplier suggested that the trees should be pruned further.  A date was agreed but the foresters didn\rquote 
t arrive.  Time dragged on and the trees grew back to their original height.  Again, the electric supplier suggested they be pruned or felled.  A new date was agreed upon.  However, the foresters couldn\rquote 
t do the job because the isolator switch was on farmland and they couldn\rquote t get access to it because of FMD restrictions.  And so it dragged on!  Despite visits by foresters and electric supplier reps. the trees got bigger and I was forbidden t
o touch them.  Neighbours could hear crackling noises coming from the wires and it became very worrying.  People suggested that I should \lquote do something about it\rquote 
.  I took the matter up directly with the supplier and the foresters.  I was promised dates only for them to be cancelled.  In December 2002, a date of 21}{\super\insrsid11994229 st}{\insrsid11994229 
 January 2003 was given.  This time, they came and we agreed that two trees be felled and another pruned.  After 30 months it finally happened. 
\par Thursday.  Met a small holder who has his land on t
he edge of this village, who told me that the 20 day rule of animal restriction of animal movement was being lifted and replaced by a 6 day restriction.  This was good news for him and any other farmer.  Later that day I met another farmer who didn
\rquote t know that the restriction was being lifted.  You would have thought that I had told him he\rquote d won the lottery!  Good news all round for the people.
\par Friday.  Listening to the local radio today and was surprised to hear a report that the Citizens Advice Bureau in 
a small Lakeland town had been receiving clients who were still experiencing hardship due to FMD.  It is now 18 months since the last outbreak and the effects (according to the person being interviewed) were still being felt.  Not just by farmers and agri
c
ulturists, but by guest houses, hotels, tradesmen and in particular, some self employed.  Debt seems to be the biggest problem.  It seems as though some people had weathered the hardships of FMD initially only to find that their plans had come adrift some
how afterwards.  Quite disturbing to hear that the situation is still with us in this county to some degree. 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 45
\par }{\insrsid11994229 These diaries were instituted to deal with the after effects of FMD.  Although there were no cases of FMD in this village, everyone knew 
about it, particularly as nearly everyone who went to work from here would pass the main farm in the village centre, or, some of the farms on the outskirts of the village.
\par Now that FMD is over, most people who live here don\rquote t seem to think about it anymore.  The only people affected are the farmers, naturally.
\par This is a strange village in lots of ways.  Only the farmer and his immediate family are connected with agriculture.  The rest are professional people or people who work at nearby Sellafield, industri
es in Workington and Whitehaven, or are retired.  There is no church, no village pub, no village shop, no village community centre or meeting place.  Only tradesmen that call are the milkman and the solid fuel merchant.  We are left to \lquote 
get on with life\rquote  i
n our own way.  The parish of Distington to which we belong have all the facilities associated with a larger community, such as a church, pub and community centre.  All of which are two miles away.  Consequently, the Parish Council meets there once a mont
h and discusses all the problems of the area including ours.  However, our representative on the council has resigned and no-one has come forward to represent us.  Anything that has been discussed at the Parish Council is reported in he local newspaper.  

\par Village pubs are a good venue to discuss local issues and to exchange views and, mainly, to gossip.  Village \lquote tittle tattle\rquote 
 as I call it!  As we have no pub, the gossip is rife from one source or another with bits added on or left out as is the choice of the person concerned.  Quite a lot of people one meets are \lquote experts\rquote 
 in their own particular choice of subject whether it is politics, finance or Mrs Jones current boy friend.  It is a fault to take on board all that is gossiped about when one meets a fellow villager in the country lanes whilst out walking the dog.
\par 
\par   
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 46
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Illness to a family member.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 47
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Continued illness.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 48
\par }{\insrsid11994229 Over the past few weeks there has been a lot of tree felling in the near
by woods.  This has led to a lot of disturbance to the villagers because of the use of large vehicles needed to remove the felled timber and also the foresters vehicles churning up the grass verges and the ditches.
\par A lot of concern was raised about the necessity of all the tree felling.  These concerns were raised in the press and also in the parish council.  (I have written about these in diaries in the last few weeks).
\par It was reported in mid-January that all the felled woods would be replanted this year, 
with footpaths created for the enjoyment of the local population.  Now, all timber operations have ceased.  Large areas of woodland have been left partly felled and a lot of felled timber is left lying about.  Foresters vehicles have gone and nothing is h
appening.  Despite assurances from the developers, it looks as though something drastic has happened.  Village \lquote tittle tattle\rquote 
 says that the foresters have not been paid for their work so far and that the developers have run out of money.  If this is so, what is going to happen now?
\par When felling started late last year, I contacted two environmental agencies regarding the threat to the red squirrels, badgers and buzzards that occupy these woods.  I was told that it was only a partial felling and they (the env
ironmental agencies) were satisfied that any disturbances would be slight.  I think that they were told this by the developers, and accepted what they were told without a site visit.  The developers have been known to mislead groups in the past, including
 landowners, farmers, councils and individuals.
\par I, personally am not happy about this situation.  I have always took a keen interest in wildlife and feel that we have been let down by the lies of developers and the lack of serious interest from wildlife age
ncies, some of which are an offshoot of central Government.  I for one will keep a close look on the situation with or without other villagers and in particular, local councillors.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid11994229 Week 49
\par }{\insrsid11994229 By chance I met three small holders all at the same time.  They w
ere discussing farming by the roadside.  All of them were pleased that the 20-day ruling was coming to an end and that their lives were more or less coming back to normal.  They also expressed the opinion that the 20-day rule and the 6-day rule were only 
i
n force to protect their interests.  However, they were unanimous in their condemnation over the importing of foreign meat and meat products into this country.  They feel that foreign meat is not subjected to enough checks before entry into the United Kin
gdom.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 51
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Met a farmer today who told me that he\rquote 
d seen a report based on findings by the EU and DEFRA. It stated all the things that everyone who is an agriculturalist and those who take an interest in the countryside had been saying about what was w
rong with the handlers of the FMD outbreak. It just proves that it doesn\rquote 
t take an academic genius to know what should have been done at the time. Everyone can be wiser after the event, but statements by the NFU and individuals at the onset were not heeded
. For example, the movement of animals should have been halted sooner and the Army should have been brought in much sooner. Now, the question of vaccination rumbles on. Should we or shouldn\rquote 
t we vaccinate? There is a fear of the outbreak again, particularly when the findings of the 1960 outbreak were not implemented. 
\par Since the sadness of FMD, there has been quite a few instances of socialising at the farm, such as harvest festival, jubilee party and almost any excuse for a \lquote shindig\rquote , good to see farmers enjoying themselves.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 52
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
Met out local farmer who told me that there is to be new legislation to dispose of fallen stock. No longer can a farmer bury fallen stock on his land, but must now provide an incinerator to dispose of dead animals. This must be 
a costly business, could dead animals not be taken to a central point and burned?
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 Week 54
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 
One thing about FMD was the effect that it had on the poaching fraternity. Living in a rural area, we expect this to happen. Nobody seems to mind that a few rabbits
 and pheasants go missing. What is really alarming is the use of dogs and high-powered rifles to poach deer. FMD put a stop to all this. Now a neighbour has told me of poachers near to the village using rifles and shooting deer. The only people benefiting
 from this are the poachers and hoteliers who receive these dead beasts and no questions asked. Also the danger of villagers being hit by stray rifle shots causes alarm to others.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid11994229 Week 55
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11994229 I think that there is a lot of jumping on the band wagon now that F
MD has cleared up. For instance, I listened to an interview on the local radio station given by a hotelier. Things weren\rquote 
t going well in his establishment. Having got over FMD and its implications, visitors were slowly returning to the area, but not in sufficient numbers to cause great joy. 
\par }}