{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid5184027\rsid5192553\rsid8221167\rsid11366003}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\title           }{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr12\min4}{\version3}{\edmins0}{\nofpages21}{\nofwords5956}{\nofchars33952}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws39829}
{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot5192553 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\template C:\\Program Files\\Microsoft Office\\Templates\\Normal.dot}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5184027 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5184027 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5184027 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5184027 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz1\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5184027 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid5192553 Lancaster University}{\insrsid5184027 
\par Interview ID:  PM41
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\insrsid5184027 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid8221167 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs17\insrsid5184027 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid5184027 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid5184027        
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid5184027 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname date}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 7}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}07/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid5184027 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid5184027 Date of birth: 1970
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid5184027 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid5184027 Occupation: Group 2}{\cs21\fs24\super\insrsid5184027 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid5184027 \chftn }{\insrsid5184027  }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Group 1 }{
\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5184027 

\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid5184027 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid5184027 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid5184027 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs24\insrsid5184027 I had driven through torrential rain and floods to get to the small lakeside town where A has a}{\i\fs24\insrsid5192553 n}{
\i\fs24\insrsid5184027  Outdoor shop.  The town was bleak and sodden as I battled across the empty car park in a high wind. I climbed the wooden staircase and walked into the}{\i\fs24\insrsid5192553  }{\i\fs24\insrsid5184027 light, w
ood panelled shop, packed with bright colours and interesting displays.  A bell on the door announced my presence and A appeared from a small office to the left of me.  We tucked ourselves onto a wooden bench by the footwear, adjacent to a huge arched win
dow.  Outside the weather painted a dark, oppressive day.  I placed the tape recorder between us. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid5184027 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid5184027 Can you tell me a little bit about yourself and your background?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid5184027 I was born up in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Scotland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in a  rural place, lived there till I was nine then moved to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Darlington{\*\xmlclose}
, lived there for about three years and then my parents bought a business down in n {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Pooley{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bridge{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose},  gift shop and caf\'e9.  So it was on my twelfth birthday we moved there.   I grew up in the flat above the shop and caf\'e9 and sort of worked there all the
 time, living above the business.  Mum and Dad being in business, it was something that I grew up with all the time.  When I was sixteen, I moved to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}
 to go to college to do hairdressing, I fancied doing hairdressing, and I went there to do that but \{
PAUSE]    it would have driven me insane.  I was the only bloke on the course, and all the girls were just like really shallow.   Just like all they discussed was hair and makeup and who their boyfriend beat up last night sort of thing, you know, and I j
ust thought I can\rquote t have these as work colleagues for the rest of my life or I\rquote 
ll just go insane [EMPHASIS].   So I knocked that on the head and went to do some psychology and sociology at Tech and then [PAUSE]   after that I got a job in an office selling
 oil, fuel oil and working off the lorries did, did that for a while, then got fed up of being stuck in an office all the time and went off travelling for a bit [PAUSE]    round France, Holland and Belgium, and I had plans to go further a field but I ran 
o
ut of money and found it hard getting work and sort of came back after that and then after that, I was on the dole for a bit  staying in bed-sits in Carlisle and then moved back over here.  I moved back to work for my parents and I was working there then 
I moved into a bungalow just over the road here in Glenridding.  Lived there for a while, and then my parents sold T, and I came here\'85
 They had T and they had this place as well and my brother was running here so I came here after they sold T.  I worked with my brother for a while he\rquote d been here ten years and he just felt he wanted a change you know.  His heart wasn\rquote 
t in it anymore really, so originally when he was going to sell it  I thought well yeh, this is a good time to do something new, a new career, a new direction, so I moved to London  and I was going to become a VT[Video Tape] editor.  I\rquote 
ve got a few friends who are videotape editors down there, and they were saying, if you\rquote re serious you can shadow us and we\rquote ll show you what to do and then you can 
get a job as an apprentice.  So went down to do that, but it took me about three days to realise; I don\rquote t want to live in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 [sub sentence stressed].   The logistics of getting from A to B were just such a nightmare [EMPHASIS]    and just thinking the sort of place I could afford on an apprentice salary I\rquote 
ll be getting my car robbed and getting burgled every night, and I just thought; as far as quality of life goes, living round Ullswater, I think you can\rquote t get any better really, and I thought why take 
such a step back to live in London, so I knocked that on the head came here  and then took over running here.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So how long have you had this business?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I\rquote ve been managing it for three [PAUSE],   three years now.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par So you manage it with your parents or for your parents?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I manage it for them really.  I mean my Dad's here a lot.  Especially this last year because we had to lay staff off.  He was saying he really wanted to retire this year, he wanted to pull out but he\rquote s not had the chance, we
\rquote ve had to shout on him with no one else to back us up.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So what was business like before the foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I mean all right.  It\rquote s not the sort of business you\rquote ll ever make your fortune on but it ticks away nicely.  I mean it\rquote s a good friendly [EMPHASIS] industry.  Everyone that\rquote s here, they\rquote 
re either walking or they're on holiday so you\rquote re not getting that many disgruntled people and you know and it\rquote s a good friendly industry to work in.  But then once foot and mouth hit, that was February, and it was strang
e [EMPHASIS]   because in previous [EMPHASIS]   years the big manufacturers like \lquote Karrimor\rquote , they\rquote ve always over produced, made too much stock and then dumped it into various outlets really cheap and it\rquote 
s always messed up the industry for everyone else,   like how can you expect me to sell this for full price when over there you\rquote 
ve got all these things cheaper.  The industry trade show,  last February, about this time last year [PAUSE],  there was a really good optimistic feeling,   everyone was saying all 
the supplies have run out of all the over produce, and there won't be the dumping, we\rquote ll probably get full margin for things, and it was really optimistic feeling, a really good feel about it, and everyone was saying; yeh this year we\rquote 
ll go to go back to the good old days and we\rquote ll make some money this year and then foot and mouth started.  Actually I think it was while I was at the trade show, it was announced, but everybody was like; it won\rquote 
t be a problem, it might last a month or something but then they\rquote ll get it sorted.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Did you know what it was?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 What the actual disease? }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yes.}{\b\f0\insrsid5184027   }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I mean I had an idea what it was.  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  
\par 
\par Have you got friends in farming?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well yes, well I mean where I live, S, S Hall, the farm opposite me, they were about the third in the country to get it or something.  As soon as they got it, I was thinking like [PAUSE] , I didn\rquote 
t want to think; am I going to bring it into the valley you know.  So I phoned up the National Park Warden, and I phoned up a couple of the other farmers, the Xs and a
 couple of the other people, and was saying; look shall I stay away from Glenridding, I live right [EMPHASIS] opposite the Xs and am I going to bring it down here.  They all said if it does come down to the valley there\rquote 
s no-one pointing the finger at you, there\rquote s that many people come down this way.  But I was just really concerned [EMPHASIS]  I wouldn\rquote t want to bring it and I wouldn\rquote t want everyone in the village pointing a finger.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So although you could still get from work to home and visa versa, did you remain feeling guilty or were you reassured?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No, I mean I\rquote ve got some friends who live near Carlisle and they\rquote ve just moved house, and I\rquote 
d arranged to go and see them one night [PAUSE]  and then when Xs got foot and mouth I phoned them up to say is there any live stock near you, and they said yeh there\rquote s cows in the bottom of the field, they\rquote 
re all opposite, and I said well I won't come and see you then, I don\rquote t want to be [PAUSE]\'85  you know, I just restricted my movement a lot, I don\rquote t want it on my conscience you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So foot and mouth, you were actually at a Trade Fair in February, but the general feeling..?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 It was still fairly optimistic.  The feeling in the industry was well this is a bit of a bugger but nobody even thought about closing the fells, nobody thought that would happen, they were just saying you know [PAUSE]     it\rquote 
s a bugger but it shouldn\rquote t sort of affect us too much.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So when did foot and mouth start to bite?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par Well originally they put a voluntary ban on the fells, they asked people not to go onto the fells.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 That was about March was it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 That was in February I think [PAUSE] that will be the voluntary ban, and then about 
a week later they put a compulsory ban with a 5000 pounds fine.  As soon as they put the voluntary ban on, I was thinking this is going to affect us, but I was naively confident in our Government's ability to handle this and I was thinking you know, well 
if they ban the fells, stop the fells being used now, if they jump on everything with as much determination and as much attention to detail as they have this, it\rquote ll be wiped out  within a few weeks and we\rquote 
ll get Easter and everything will be back to normal, and I mean the way they\rquote ve buggered about and left the carcasses lying around for ages [PAUSE].  It\rquote 
s like the Xs near us, they left the carcasses lying there for about a week, and I know all the farms near us, there\rquote s one at Eamont Bridge, they were saying it\rquote 
s because of rats [EMPHASIS]  or badgers or something crawling over the carcasses there and going up and round there.  And it was just when you saw how badly [EMPHASIS]   they were handling it, it became frustrating.
\par 
\par Thankfully it became obvious that it was going to affect us quick\tab 
 enough where  in this industry after all you follow orders, you have to order your Spring, Summer and your Autumn, Winter nearly a year ahead, and I managed to cancel near enough all my Spring, Summer orders before they c
ame in.  If they had have came in and I had to pay for them and then found out I had no customers, we really would have been in trouble.  I just put a blanket e-mail around to all my suppliers just saying do not [EMPHASIS] send me any stock and please sen
d me an e-mail back, saying you\rquote ve received this.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Was it a bit chaotic because presumably you weren\rquote t the only one doing this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No because I think I was one of the first.  I jumped right [EMPHASIS]   on it and I just thought [PAUSE], there\rquote s no money coming into the till so I don\rquote 
t want to be spending any.  So I jumped right on it and the suppliers were coming back to me and saying; oh well we can do easy payments and this that and the other and I was saying no like just postpone it for now and that\rquote s what 
made it a lot easier to bear. Chris the guy we were employing, he was on holiday, he was climbing in Spain for a week, and it had broke out while he was away.  He came back and we had to lay him [EMPHASIS] off.
\par 
\par  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 And when you laid him off, was that with a view to re-employing?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No, it was originally.  He\rquote d said to us\'85 [PAUSE],  he was a very well educated guy.  When he applied for the job, we\rquote d said to him; look I want someone who\rquote 
s going to be here for a few years, someone who we can train up on the computer, train up in boot fitting and all the skills, and he was saying, \'93oh well, I\rquote m not sure how serious I am, like that.\'94  He was saying there\rquote 
s a limit to what you can get paid in retail and he was wanting something better.  But when we came to lay him off, it was [EMPHASIS]   with a view that this is a shit situation, sorry for having to do this but hopefully things will improve and I\rquote 
ll get back in touch with you.  I mean that was something I\rquote d never ever wanted to do.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 How long had he been with you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well he\rquote d been just short of a year [PAUSE].      He\rquote d started in the April I think.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So he\rquote d been through the seasons with you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yeh, yeh.  I mean, without sounding mercenary, it was lucky that he had been here just under a year because we didn\rquote 
t have to pay him any redundancy or anything.  Having to make somebody redundant was something I hoped to never have to do and I mean we got on fine,     he was a nice fellow.  He  took it kind of personally [PAUSE]   and he was like [PAUSE] and I was say
ing to him; look [EMPHASIS] this is a shit situation, its shit for you and it's shit for me.  I said, I\rquote ve had to make you redundant and I might lose my business and have to get bank loans on this, it\rquote s not a good situation for everyone, it
\rquote s not personal.  But he kind of ended up shouting and talking about where I could stick [EMPHASIS]things and that, and that was very bad.  And it was just like, it doesn\rquote t have to be personal, we don\rquote 
t have to fall out about this [PAUSE]. And he did come and see me a couple of months later and said like, how ya doing and this that and the other.  I was pleased that he\rquote d come to see me because I don\rquote 
t like having any bad feeling between people.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  So that must have been quite traumatic?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par   It was, it was something I hoped to never [EMPHASIS] do and something I hope never [EMPHASIS]to have to do again.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  So you laid him off some time In the March?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Just at the start of March really when it became obvious, you know, when we realised just how bad it was.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  Did you find any sense of confusion from people about access to the fells?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Oh God  yes.  People were [PAUSE]\'85 well they're reading on the news that every [EMPHASIS] where\rquote s closed and stay off the fells.  And then Tony Blair would be coming on tele saying, the Lake District is
 open for business, so don\rquote 
t stay away and all this.  And people, I think they thought; if we go into the lakes, we are going to be stared at or shouted at and asked to leave, sort of thing.   I mean most walkers are more sensible people and they didn\rquote t wa
nt to do the wrong thing, so they just all stayed away.   I think the towns, Keswick and Ambleside didn\rquote t suffer as much as we did here because there\rquote 
s other attractions there, and people were  encouraged to go to the other towns.  Whereas the only   reason people come to Glenridding really, is to go walking, and if you\rquote re not allowed to go walking you\rquote 
re just not going to come here.  Like that famous bit of reporting [when the local newspaper ran a story about A's business], one shoelace in three days episode, you know, there was like just nobody [EMPHASIS] here.  You couldn\rquote 
t [EMPHASIS]   justify having any staff and it was so obvious to Chris that, you know, there was no work for him.  But like I say he slowly got really bad about it.   I keep thinking di
d I handle it badly, you know, was I funny with him or anything.  I don\rquote t think I was.  I tried to be just honest and present the situation; we\rquote d always got on at that level.}{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par 
\par So as time went on, what was happening for the business?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well the business just stayed at\'85 we hardly made any [EMPHASIS] money at all.  Easter just didn\rquote t happen.  I did buy a little bit of stock.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par Easter is normally the start of your season isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yes, Easter fortnight is normally really good for us. I bought a little bit of stock in.  I bought some lightweight shirts and trekking clothing, thinking well, if people are going abroad on holiday, this is the sort of thing they
\rquote ll take.  I wish I hadn\rquote t, but I wasn\rquote t to know.  But I thought, do I have no stock and maybe have customers, or will there be nobody here and I\rquote m left with the stock which turned out to be the case.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Did you get support from your industry?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yeh, to be fair most of our suppliers were very good. I\rquote d said to them I don\rquote t want to take any stock in.   The stock I did take in at Easter they said,  \'93
you can have 60 days credit on this, and then if you need longer let us know.\'94  I had a few suppliers saying, \'93 well take this in, and you know, you can sorta have 60 days.\'94  Anything  that I wasn\rquote t sure on you know, that didn\rquote 
t fit in with the way I saw business going last year, I was just like no, so but in general [EMPHASIS]   the industry they were saying, \'93look, it\rquote s sat in our warehouse, we\rquote 
d rather have it sat in the shop with a chance of selling rather than have it sat there.\'94     And it was in their interest to support us.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Did you have friends that were in a similar situation?
\par 
\par }\pard \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5184027 Yes well I mean there\rquote s my friend J. He\rquote s a shop on the corner there [points toward a row of shops that we can
 see from the window].     There\rquote s something my Mum and Dad always say to me, and it\rquote 
s something I appreciate, is like, I am lucky [EMPHASIS] having a good friend in the same place, well not the same industry, but you know, gifts shop and ice creams.  He asks whenever anybody organises a do for bank holidays, he has to say he can\rquote 
t go he can\rquote t get the time off work, as I always do.   So it\rquote s nice to have someone that\rquote s in the same boat as you, you don\rquote t feel so out\'85 most people have normal jobs, and weekends off and things like that, it\rquote 
s nice to have another  friend who understands.
\par }\pard \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 What was the worst aspect of that time?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 The worst aspect was [PAUSE],I think it was handling my father, you know, who was here before.   He\rquote s a real [EMPHASIS] control freak, I mean he really is.  I mean if something is out of his control, he just doesn\rquote 
t know what to do, and he gets in a bad [EMPHASIS]  mood and starts shouting and kicking off, you know, because he\rquote s not in control and he can\rquote t handle it.   So he would be coming down here\'85
 I was like, on top of everything, cancelling orders, you know, I really was keeping my eye on everything,   not letting anything run away with me [PAUSE]    then he\rquote d come down here and he\rquote 
d shout, have you not done this and have you not done that [ANGRY RAISED VOICE FOR SUB SENTENCE].    It was handling him\'85    I mean that\rquote s why I started smoking again, because I\rquote 
d stopped smoking in January and it was him coming down here and being in a bad mood.  And then as soon as he opened the door it wa
s like a dark cloud entering the building, and then all the customers would pick up on it, and you know he was in such a bad mood and so unreasonable.  We ended up having a big fall out, and I said; look, either you go, or I go.  It\rquote 
s so unfair to expect people to tolerate you while you\rquote re in this kind of mood    and I said, if I was in a mood like that, I\rquote d go home and wouldn\rquote t speak to anyone. It\rquote 
s not fair to force that dark cloud on me, Mum and the customers in the shop, so [PAUSE] I ended up booting him out for a while really.  Then he came down, he was sort of a bit better a bit mellower [PAUSE].   I mean he\rquote 
s like that with everything, as I say, If it\rquote s out of his control he\rquote s like a one man war machine.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Where was your mum in all of this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Stuck in the middle [PAUSE] sort of putting up with all his ranting at home, and then putting up with me, going like, bloody hell,  it\rquote s doing my head in.  And she\rquote 
d try and say to him, look A is doing the best he can, it\rquote s in the hands of the Gods here.  But it\rquote s just he can\rquote t accept that.  He can\rquote t accept things being out of his control.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par So are you saying the epidemic actually affected your personal life?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Oh yeh, yeh in as far as [PAUSE] I didn\rquote t stop smoking which I wanted to.  And it certainly affected my health.  I normally do a lot of biking and climbing.  I\rquote 
ve not been out on my bike for over a year, so my level of fitness will be a lot less to what it normally is.  Where I live at l, it\rquote s the start of High Street [ fell ridge, PAUSE]   Askham Fell; I love [EMPHASIS]    biking up there.  }{
\b\f0\insrsid5184027  }{\f0\insrsid5184027     
\par And it\rquote s only been open about a month .    It was one of the last places to open up.   So yeh, through business wise and the stress.      Like I say; the stress of dealing with my father, that was the bad bit.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Was there anyone you could turn to outside of the family?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Not really [PAUSE]   I was going out [PAUSE]\'85 I was having a bad relationship at the time [LAUGHS].   I was going out with this girl and she just became really [PAUSE]\'85    I finished with her and she just e
nded up stalking me for ages.  She was just so possessive of me.  If I wanted a night out without her, she\rquote d be in a mood; well why can\rquote t  I come out.  
\par 
\par So I had my father freaking out, I had this neurotic girlfriend to deal with, my business going down t
he pan.  It was a pretty bad time for me.  But [PAUSE]    you just deal with it.  Just kicked father out, finished with the girlfriend and came back here [LAUGHTER]  and waited for the customers to return.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So was there any time when you felt you would like to contact some kind of organisation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No [PAUSE] it\rquote s not like\'85it\rquote s not like\'85 years and years ago I sort of had a bit of depression.  It was when I was about 18 or something, and I just felt like I\rquote 
d run out of happiness, and it was really scary because I wasn\rquote t happy and normally I\rquote 
m a happy person and I just felt like what is wrong with me and that was really scary.  Whereas this time, I was in a bad mood and I was like RRRRRR irritable but I knew what was causing it.  I knew my Dad was pissing me off,
 my girlfriend was insane, this business was going down the pan, so [PAUSE] it\rquote s just a matter of dealing with it.   If I\rquote d been in a bad mood and I didn\rquote t know why, then that would have been scary, but when you know what\rquote 
s causing it you can deal with it.  So [PAUSE] it wasn\rquote t so much of a case of dealing with mental health issues, it was just being angry but focusing that anger and trying to sort everything out, you know.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par Did it affect your social life? Apart from the fact that you had no money, which I presume is a big part of that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 [LAUGHTER]  yeh, I did sort of [PAUSE]\'85  I took a cut in money while the [PAUSE]\'85 I stopped drawing as much while there was none coming in [PAUSE].    As far as my social life [LONGISH PAUSE]\'85I suppose it did [PAUSE]    it d
id in a way because I didn\rquote t have any staff; I was working seven days a week.  I mean I didn\rquote t close at all, I opened right through the time, and I\rquote 
d be sat here determined thinking if someone wants to buy some over trousers or something I\rquote ll be here for them, I\rquote m not going to miss a sale.  So I didn\rquote t have any time off really, whereas normally I\rquote 
d have staff to cover my days off.  I ended up working all summer and we normally have lots of camping trips through the summer and I couldn\rquote t do that because ever
ywhere was closed [PAUSE].  So yeh, my social life was definitely affected by it, yeh.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 You said you like biking and climbing.  Are you part of local clubs?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027  No, I\rquote m not really [PAUSE]\'85  I\rquote m not really interested in sort of [PAUSE]   clubby organisations.  I\rquote ve got a good few friends that are into biking and if one of them\'85  you know I\rquote 
ll give them a ring and say; do you fancy going on the bikes today.  I\rquote m always\'85 It\rquote s like when we were on holiday in France last year [PAUSE]\'85 I\rquote ve never been on any kind of organised holiday or any thing like that, I\rquote 
ve always just done my own thing\'85and one of the ski tour operators was saying right we\rquote re having a pub crawl down town on whatever night it was, do you want to sign up for it, it\rquote s great fun, come on.  There wa
s five of us so we thought alright go on, it might be a laugh, so signed up for it and it was nauseating .     This club rep\'85  this lady that was our club rep there\'85  and she turned up there and said, \'93right come on then, let\rquote 
s get the bus into town.\'94  We came down, got the bus into town, and she said; \'93right, were going to this bar.\'94
  It was like only us five and her.  It was like she was our nominated friend for the night.  She was there to make sure we had fun and things like that.  I was like well, I can have my own fun thanks, I don\rquote 
t need anybody to show me round the clubs.  I\rquote ve always veered away from that sort of thing; I like to just do things on me own and with my friends.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Was there any sense of friction between you and your farming friends throughout this crisis?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par I\rquote ve never voiced my true thoughts to my friends that are in the farming
\par industry.  I mean I am very sympathetic with them, but I mean [PAUSE]    what really annoys me, especially in this country I think, people have this romantic image
 of the farmer and his dairy herd and he knows everyone and all his sheep he loves dearly.    And the truth of the matter is, they don\rquote t mean much more to him than that rucksack means to me .  It\rquote s stock,   it\rquote 
s his living and they say, you don\rquote t understand we\rquote ve had all our stock killed and ra ra ra [RAISED VOICE FOR SUB SENTENCE].  It\rquote s like yeh [EMPHASIS],     but you got ten times the market price for it.  
\par 
\par If someone was to come in here and say, I\rquote m sorry, there\rquote s a fabric eating bug or something in your shop and we\rquote re going to have to burn all your stock, but you\rquote ll be compensated at ten times the market value, I\rquote 
d be like hooray, bring it on.  And that\rquote s basically what happened to farmers.  That is the one thing among all of this that really needs an
 inquiry.  Where did they come up with the price?  Why do they get so much money  [PAUSE]  for, you know, an over inflated stock price?  And you get the farmers saying like; \'93oh I\rquote m so depressed, I\rquote ve lost my stock \'93
and blah blah, and they drive off in their new Jag, I\rquote m off on holiday, you know, a month in bloody Barbados or something.  And they\rquote re just dripping in cash, while I was really suffering I was on to every government body, Business Link}{
\cs21\f0\super\insrsid5184027 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid5184027 \chftn }{
\insrsid5184027  }}}{\f0\insrsid5184027 , everyone, saying; this can\rquote t be any help, what\rquote 
s going on, come on help me.  Everyone pointed out from the start; there will   be no compensation for tourism.  You know, the government,      you know, Nick Brown  [PAUSE]   blatantly came out and said; we are not going to have any compensation for tour
ism, it\rquote s only for agriculture.   And that\rquote 
s what really annoyed me.  Why does one industry, subsidise a useless non money making industry anyway you know, get all this compensation, and an effective one, you know, peoples livelihood and job depends on, doesn\rquote 
t.        It was the inconsistencies [EMPHASIS], that's what really annoyed me.  But as far as my relationships with friends went, it was just like, we didn\rquote t talk about it, or if we did talk about it I\rquote 
d just say, oh you poor sod, you know, but not voice my true opinions on the matter.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 But In terms of business recovery funds..?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027  We did get the money from Business Link [PAUSE].   And I mean, there\rquote s rumours going round [PAUSE]\'85 you know friends that are in business in different parts of the country, th
at are; have you heard about this and have you heard about that.  And I\rquote d be on the phone to Business Link everyday   after I\rquote d heard a new rumour, and quite often they\rquote d say; oh I don\rquote t know about that, I haven\rquote 
t heard about that.   And I\rquote d say; well my friend in Yorkshire or whatever, says this is happening.  And you know every area got different grant criteria.  And so you hear about one from somewhere else and ask about that, and they say; oh that
\rquote s not available here [PAUSE].   The one for Cumbria was 
one of the last ones to be introduced, so I was getting more and more frantic, you know phoning them up all the time.   Well we did eventually get the recovery grant, and again they were keen to emphasise this is not compensation, this is to try and make 
your business more stable in the future to be able to survive this kind of thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Did you find that the grant was tied to particular activities such as marketing?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well it was yeh.  There was 6000 pounds for marketing, 2000 pounds for I.T. and they would pay interest relief up to seven and a half thousand pounds.  They\rquote 
d pay your interest up to seven and a half thousand pounds on any loans incurred because of foot and mouth.    Our main rivalry, a shop in Keswick, F\'85   us and F for the last three years, we\rquote 
ve always been voted as outdoor retailer of the year, for the Northern area. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 That\rquote s quite impressive. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Oh it is yeh.  That\rquote s for the whole of the North [EMPHASIS],    which is the Peak District, Lake District, Northumberland. It\rquote s voted for by customers, and then you get a mystery shop, and it\rquote 
s all on service,      and I\rquote m really proud of that.  I\rquote m very service orientated.  I like everyone to leave the shop, knowledgeable, with the right kit, and with a good experience.  So It does mean a lot to us that.  But F always\'85 they
\rquote re a more political shop [PAUSE],   like the Chairman from F is on the 'Outdoor Industries Association' and now he\rquote s the Chairman of it\'85  all the industry and customers [PAUSE].. well not so much customers, but the industry always 
holds up F as a shining light of how an outdoor shop should be  [PAUSE]  and I know for a fact that we give better service to our customers.  They\rquote re much more money orientated, whereas I\rquote 
m much more service orientated.  And it always annoys me when they get this esteem that they don\rquote t deserve in my opinion.  But I\rquote 
d heard a rumour [PAUSE],    one of the reps told me that Fs had taken out a loan for half a million pounds to see them through the year because it was such hard times.  And then I later on found out\'85
that was about fortnight before Business Link said, if you take out any loans because of foot and mouth we\rquote ll pay your interest for you.  So I was straight on, I was saying like, did you tip Fs off about that?  \lquote 
Cos it was the amount they borrowed [PAUSE]     would have just [PAUSE]\'85      the interest on that amount for one year was exactly what they were offering, so it was like, that\rquote s a bit of a coincidence.  Again it\rquote 
s the inconsistencies, if everyone\rquote s treated the same, then you think well fair enough, no grumbles, but when one person gets privileged another\rquote s left behind.  One person gets a nod and a wink and another one doesn\rquote t, that\rquote 
s when my    blood starts to boil.  So I was on to Business Link and they said they can\rquote t discuss other peoples concerns and I said I bet you can\rquote t.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So that kind of frustration, do you have coping mechanisms?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Beer and fags  [LOTS OF LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 And drinking, was that more than usual?  }{\f0\insrsid5184027  
\par 
\par No, I wouldn\rquote t say I was a heavy drinker.  I sort of enjoy a drink but I\rquote m not drunk every night or anything.  I don\rquote t think I was drinking more than normal really, no.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 What about sleeping and worrying about the business?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yeh I mean [PAUSE]  I suppose at the time I was a bit.  I mean it\rquote s something I\rquote m bad for anyway.  Even on a good thing or a bad thing, [PAUSE] \rquote 
ll lie in bed at night and sort of think about a new window display or thinking about anything to do with work or an order, thinking should I have ordered that or that instead.  And I\rquote ll lie there in bed thinking abo
ut it, and then fall asleep [PAUSE]\'85 and my Mum does exactly the same\'85 I\rquote 
ll wake up about three or four in the morning, going Eureka, and I have a moment of clarity and I get out of bed and start writing things down.  Just like having all these good ideas 
in the middle of the night and writing them down before I forget them and then not sort of getting back to sleep afterwards.   I wouldn\rquote t say it was any worse then it is\'85as I say, if I have a good idea it\rquote 
ll be just as good to my sleep as if I\rquote m worrying about something.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So your Mum and Dad, do you live with them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No I live at S and they live at W.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 And your brother, is he local?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I\rquote ve got one brother who lives in S.  The one who used to run here he lives in S and I\rquote ve got another one in Sheffield
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Are you quite close?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par Yeh, reasonably.  I mean my brother who lives in S, I get on with him really  well [PAUSE]  we go climbing, biking and go carting and we do lots together. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 You\rquote ve got a similar outlook?}{\f0\insrsid5184027   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027  }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yeh.  He\rquote s actually working for DEFRA at the mom
ent.  He left running this place, then he went to get a job [PAUSE]  he was working for one of our suppliers and then he had a fall out with them and left that and then when [local employment agency] were employing people just to build the pyres and every
thing.  He went to work for them \lquote cos it was good money and then he went to work for DEFRA in the offices and he\rquote s kind of\'85well he\rquote s got a really good job there, he really enjoys it.  He\rquote s got a good job but it\rquote 
s the protocol of working for local Government, you know, like in any civil servant job.  It\rquote s driving him insane \lquote cos he\rquote s use to running here, you have an idea and he\rquote ll go and do it, you know, he\rquote 
ll think that was smart and he\rquote ll go and do it.  Whereas you're just not encouraged to think for yourself in that situation.  There\rquote s a protocol with everything, and everyone\rquote 
s got to do as theyr'e told and in their place and I think the restrictions [PAUSE] he finds that really hard.  But his contracts going to be up soon anyway and he\rquote ll be looking for another job.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So has anything positive come out of this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well the grants we got from Business Link [PAUSE] which they were keen to say, is not for compensation it\rquote s to make you more stable and hopefully we have done that.  I mean the I.T.  Money, I got a
 scanner, a really good quality printer and a better computer with a really good art package on, so I can do point of sale for in here.  You know, I\rquote m making up a little [PAUSE] like, shelf talkers all with the company logo on.  I\rquote 
ve had R print us up these little things and I can put them through the printer and print out   you know, man's rucksack, 35 litres and the price.  So,  well there\rquote ll be a bit more continuity.  So we\rquote 
re doing things like that and the main thing is, we\rquote ve had a web   site built.  Well we\rquote ve always had a web site [PAUSE]   we\rquote re going into e-commerce with this one.   It\rquote 
s a friend of mine whose doing it for me, he does Carlisle Council's web site [PAUSE]  does all of that.  And we\rquote re building up a library of panoramas with a digital camera.  We\rquote 
re taking panoramas of all the areas in the Lake District and making up a library of them [PAUSE].  So it\rquote s something where if someone\rquote s been out walking or thinking of going walking, they can go and have a look and see what it\rquote 
s like or show their mates where they\rquote ve been.  We\rquote re sort of thinking of other local businesses and promoting [PAUSE] oh you know, any activities in the area, and doing  like health and safety advice, reviews. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So when people are out on the fells you can offer advice? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Yeh, yeh.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 And you can pick that up from your web site?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 Well that\rquote s it exactly.  It has the weather everyday, the local weather and in the winter it has the snow conditions on the fell tops. So we\rquote ve just been trying to make it as interesting as pos
sible, as many reasons to go to it [PAUSE]  so we\rquote ll get as many hits as possible.  I\rquote m not selling clothing  because everyone wants to, you know, try it on, feel the fabric.  I just thought it\rquote s asking for a \lquote returns\rquote 
 nightmare.  But things like rucksacks, boots, poles, foot wear, you know, things that people basically know [PAUSE]  or they know the sort of thing they\rquote re after.  I\rquote 
m hopefully going to sell all that and hopefully [PAUSE]    that will do exactly what Business Link wanted this money to do, and make us less dependent on people coming through the door, and make us tick over all year round as well.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So it\rquote s sort of like a mail order as well? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027  Yeh. Well that\rquote s it exactly, yeh.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 I suppose the final question is regarding the future, your future and the future of your business?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I do feel quite excited with the web site were building at the moment.  Because me and my friend X, we\rquote ve done it between us.  I mean he has all the computer skills, he\rquote 
s a really really [EMPHASIS] intelligent guy on the computer.  I\rquote m competent on a computer but I don\rquote t\'85 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Is he in a similar line of business?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 No, he works for [PAUSE]\'85 well he did work for C Council, and then the council got privatised, a private company came in and he works for them now, doing the C Council and various other web sites as well.  But he\rquote 
s fed up with it, like my brother.  He\rquote s just like, civil servants, it\rquote s just like there\rquote s no freethinking, there\rquote s no encouragement to like, hey go and do this.  So he\rquote s wanting to use this website [PAUSE]  
   as his portfolio really, so he can say, hey look what I\rquote ve done.  So I got this made for real mates rates, you\rquote d be talking about 4000 pounds or some thing if I\rquote d gone out and got it done normally.  With Business Link, the money we
\rquote re getting of them he\rquote s doing it.   So without foot and mouth happening and without business link giving us this money, the web site would never have been developed to this stage that it\rquote s going to be.  So that\rquote 
s a good thing that has come out of it, and I\rquote m excited about it.   I think it\rquote s the sort of thing [PAUSE]\'85  I mean it might take off and we might get a few orders a week or it really take off.  I can\rquote t see it\'85  I\rquote 
m hoping it doesn\rquote t just sort of do nothing,         I\rquote ve put such a lot of effort into it, and I know it is [PAUSE]\'85  but it\rquote s the best   website [PAUSE] from any outdoor shop or any outdoor supplier that I\rquote 
ve ever seen, you know.   It\rquote s much more exciting, much more interactive so I do think that\rquote s going to, you know [PAUSE]\'85 it might be huge or it might just trickle, but either way, you know\'85 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 So you\rquote ve had really good marketing leads to that as well, so that you get people on that site. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid5184027 That\rquote s it, yeh.  And the fact that we\rquote re encouraging people to write their own reviews in and feedback, you know.   Like myself, everyone needs to spout off about something, so we\rquote 
re encouraging that, I can see that being good.  Getting the new computer and the artwork package, that\rquote s something that we\rquote ve needed.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 Do you think this year you\rquote ll be recovering losses?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 I mean what\rquote s lost is lost, we\rquote ll never get that back [PAUSE].    I can see this year being [PAUSE]\'85  well\'85
 last October once everything was open, it was really good, we had a really good October, better than last year.  \lquote Cos people had been cooped up all year an
d it was the first chance to go out really, so we had a really good October.  And then I was thinking, well Christmas is going to be the same, and when people are off at Christmas, they\rquote 
ll have been cooped up and now get a chance to go out.  It was perfect walking weather all over Christmas, nice and cool and dry, and we weren\rquote 
t particularly busy.   So that kind of, you know, the way I had been thinking October had been really good, Christmas was the same.  When Christmas was a bit poor, I was thinking, well maybe people aren\rquote t that desperate to get out after all.  So, I
\rquote m [PAUSE]\'85 This next year, touch wood and nothing else going wrong, it\rquote ll certainly  be better than last year, but I\rquote m not sure If it\rquote ll be up to normal.  I mean, September 11}{\f0\super\insrsid5184027 th}{
\f0\insrsid5184027 ,[ 2001, the attacks on the World Trade Centre, US etc.] people aren\rquote t going to be flying with that.  That\rquote s another factor where we might have a better year because people aren\rquote 
t going abroad.  Or with all the cheap flights with Easy jet people might go abroad instead.  There\rquote s just so many factors you try and take into consideration.  I don\rquote t think we\rquote ll be back up to scratch, I think we\rquote 
ll be quieter than normal but we\rquote ll get some money in better than last year, which we desperately need, so.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 I haven\rquote t got any more questions, but is there anything you would like to add, or anything you feel we haven\rquote t touched on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 [LONG PAUSE]   My biggest [EMPHASIS] complaint about the whole thing is the way the Government handled it.  The way they jumped onto the fel
ls straight away.  Like I say, I thought well if they jump on everything with that kind of vigour then no problem.  But they were leaving carcasses lying around for about a fortnight and what have ya.  Then the farmers, you know, getting huge compensation
, much more than they would otherwise.  And then farmers like X who works for us at the weekend, he farms at M end. He didn\rquote t get foot and mouth but he wasn\rquote 
t allowed to move his sheep field to field.  So once the sheep had ate all the grass in the field, he was having to buy feed for them, he was having to pay like a fortune on feed, he\rquote s not allowed to sell anything so he\rquote 
s got no money coming in, and he didn\rquote t get a bean.   There were in this country, farmers that were really screwed by it, but they\rquote re the ones that didn\rquote t   get it, and there\rquote 
s not a bean for them.  The ones that got it got loads [PAUSE]\'85   It\rquote s just who ever sat down and thought it out, wants a smack in the face, you know they really do.  It was just so unjust, so inconsistent.  That\rquote s my
 main gripe about it, regardless of what\rquote s gone on here, you just think, it\rquote s just such bad handling, you know.  Everyone\rquote s pointing their finger at Tony Blair and this, that and the other, and you're thinking, well [PAUSE] it doesn
\rquote t matter who\rquote s in power, they\rquote re going to be taking the same information from the same civil servants, who are going to be making the same recommendations.  So it doesn\rquote 
t matter who was in power, they all would have acted as badly.   
\par  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 I thanked A for his time.
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5184027 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }}