{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 
line number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1467860\rsid2578112\rsid3368406\rsid4486391\rsid5511813\rsid7537915\rsid7680719\rsid9646938\rsid10691050}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min24}{\version8}{\edmins7}{\nofpages42}{\nofwords10064}{\nofchars57366}{\nofcharsws67296}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace107\dgvspace180\dghorigin2551\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot7680719 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid5511813 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid7680719 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\fs20\insrsid5511813 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM29}{\insrsid5511813 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs16\insrsid5511813 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid7537915 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs16\insrsid5511813 
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid5511813 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 4}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}04/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid5511813 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Date of birth: 1934
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid5511813 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 Occupation: Group 3}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid5511813  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid5511813 
\par }}}{\insrsid5511813 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid5511813 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\insrsid5511813 Interview took place at respondent\rquote 
s home, a large Victorian villa on the outskirts of the town. The house is exceptionally well cared for and we sat in a conservatory which spanned the width of the house and was furnished with comfortable chairs and a variety of large plants. At 2 points 
during the interview the respondent\rquote s wife came in to say hello and to bring us a drink. The respondent was relaxed and confident, he talked for a long time before I stopped the tape. He then continued to talk and there is a short \'93coda\'94
 where I recorded a little more}{\insrsid5511813 .
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 So we usually start er by asking about 1967 cos I think you remember that don\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s right, yeah, yeah I was a branch manager in Cockermouth for West Cumberland Farmers}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813 
 Company supplying feed for livestock and farming equipment, oil etc}}}{\insrsid5511813  at the time, and I think if I remember rightly there was only two cases
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  in Cockermouth at that time, difficult to remember exactly. I mean, there wasn\rquote t as many cattle, there wasn\rquote t as much stock about at the time, so it wasn\rquote t the same sort of problem and I don\rquote 
t think there was as much dealing going on. You know, sheep weren\rquote t moving as far as they, as they did this time, so, you know, the auctions were the most more contained, e
r  the slaughterhouses were local, you know, sort of there was a slaughterhouse in Cockermouth, for instance, so everything that was bought at Cockermouth auction by the butchers didn\rquote 
t go away, it was nearly all slaughtered here. There was a slaughterhouse in Whitehaven, there was one at Wigton, one in Carlisle, one in Penrith, you know so cattle didn\rquote t didn\rquote 
t move very far, so as just, it was easier contained then than it was this time. Erm, there\rquote s, there\rquote s one just up here. They were within probably thr
ee or four miles of one another, but the way they disposed of the animals in those days as well, I mean it was all done by quicklime and a pit, they were all shot 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 On the farm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And buried on the farm, and they were buried within, almost within the day, soon as they could get a digger there and er, but you weren\rquote t talking about a hundred and fifty cows you\rquote d probably talking \lquote 
bout forty or fifty cows.  I suppose a big flock of sheep was a hundred, so that was er, so it certainly wasn\rquote t having the impact. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I can\rquote t remember whether there was the same biosecurity as well, I mean, I can\rquote t even remember if we took our salesmen off the road we probably did, it probably wasn\rquote 
t as important then, and I can remember the previous outbreak as well,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 When was that?  Was that fifty seven?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Fifty seven yeah, yeah, I was working in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} at the time, and er, that was the same, there wasn\rquote t as many, there was even less cattle then, the herd numbers were smaller

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  and everything was just shot, and buried, on the site, nothing was moved away, all buried in quicklime.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Was there the same sense of alarm and fear that there was this time?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I don\rquote t think so, no, I think because of the numbers, you know, there was a numbers game this time, I mean we talking about thousands this time, where you\rquote 
d only talk about hundreds before, and I think it was probably better handling. I dunno who was who was the responsible people then, well they had, I mean {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumberland{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose} had a local veterinary local department based at Bridge (Pitts?)Park, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} so it\rquote d all be done from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}
 in those days er. I don\rquote t think there was the same level of compensation, huh, there wasn\rquote t the same vets running around, cos you know, we 
had a county vet, and there were more vets practices, and there were more vets anyway. So, pro rata per stock numbers there would be bigger er, bigger number of vets there, but certainly I, the, the same alarm wasn\rquote t, I mean, it didn\rquote 
t have the same effect on people, and I don\rquote t think the auctions were closed for that, that long time either (inaudible 029) in fact I\rquote m not certain that the auctions were closed at all.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 So tell me how you felt when you first heard about it this time.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well, its quite simple this time, it was down in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose}, huh, (laughs)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose} is what four hundred miles away and its an isolated case. I suppose we\rquote d heard about er foul pest and swine fever and that sort of thing and its you know, it\rquote s away its not in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} its in divorced. And even when it got to Newcastle as well, its Newcastle, its among pigs, erm, they don\rquote 
t move very far from there, they move from the farm to the slaughterhouse so, there\rquote s no way of it coming over here. And, suppose at that time we didn\rquote t realise there\rquote 
s sheep involved, and of course with being at Longtown and being the auction it was, being the centre of the sheep, the sheep business in the north of England, and Scotland, I suppose er, the outbreak at Longtown was the, 
that was when the alarm bells started to ring. The first outbreak at }{\insrsid2578112 JF}{\insrsid5511813 \rquote s, and that was when it, and even then it was sort of, you know a bit divorced, I don\rquote t think we\rquote 
d taken our salesmen off the road at that stage. You know it was only when it got round, got round local area... but unfortunately I, I was having chemotherapy at the time,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Oh no
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And er, I mean I never stopped work but I was feeling, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par er I was feeling a bit ropey, the treatment was er, injections on a Friday, erm and series of pills for a fortnight, second injection on the following Friday, at the end of the fortnight you know, I was pretty, pretty low. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par My resistance was gone and then I\rquote d build up for the next fortnight and then er, then started again, they were four weekly sequences, so...I suspect it was just as well there was foot and mouth\'85. Kept me occupied 
\par (break, tape switched off as wife comes in) 
\par and also people were a bit sympathetic to us 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I got a lot of sympathy,  aye..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 So.. 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 But anyway.. }{\i\insrsid5511813 (was trying to recollect where we had got to)}{\insrsid5511813 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par Tell me, you, you said you hadn\rquote t taken the reps off the road
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 At that early stage..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 At that early stage, so what happened next?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well then our Chairman, got it, he was the first one in west Cumberland to get it, erm, first one in the Solway Plain anyway. But we\rquote d already, we\rquote 
d decided, one weekend we would er, we asked quite a few of our people we dealt with, and other, other companies that had salesmen on the road, you know, what, what they were doing and er
, just decided one day that was it, you know.. they would, they would not go out, and we found them other jobs. I mean one of the salesmen spent the next three months disinfecting cars coming in and out of the premises, er another salesman came in the war
ehouse and acted as warehouse foreman ... but because we didn\rquote 
t know how long it was going to last we, we kept all our sort of staff on. And then as the number of cases grew, (inaudible 054) as we lost, well we lost eventually about ninety percent of our, o
f our customers, and er it was obvious that it was going to take a long time to recover, so we then decided we make four, four people redundant, so we dropped down from twelve staff to eight.  I went onto half pay, I just started working \lquote 
til lunchtime which er, huh, set an example, eer, and we decided you know, that we\rquote d work like that until, such time as we er as we recovered.  We\rquote ve since, since January, since it looks as if we\rquote 
re getting, starting to get back to normal, we\rquote ve put another salesman out on the road, we\rquote ve made, we didn\rquote t take, we\rquote ve made a girl redundant, she er, we haven\rquote 
t taken her back on. We made a salesman redundant, the one who was doing the spraying, and we haven\rquote t taken him back, we\rquote ve replaced him with a, a different type of salesman. Although we made him redundant we\rquote ve, we\rquote 
ve put a feed specialist out on the road, er, the warehouseman who was a salesman, he\rquote s gone back out on the road again. Er we made our warehouse foreman redundant, it was my brother-in-law, of course, }{\insrsid4486391 [wife]}{\insrsid5511813 
\rquote s sister\rquote s husband. I mean, we\rquote ve taken him back er...and we\rquote ve a driver made redundant and we haven\rquote t taken him back so we\rquote 
ve managed with the two vehicles instead of three. So we, we, we re-staff as, as and when the business, erm dictates, but until the end of August we didn\rquote t suffer too much, we\rquote ve sold a wide variety of things, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par you know feed, fertiliser, seeds, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par So there\rquote s always something in season, during the summer, but once September came, you know the effect on our business was quite dram
atic then, er we were running about..... er fifty percent of what our.. normal monthly turnover would be... I mean with six million annual turnover last year, you know if things don\rquote t improve we\rquote ll, we\rquote 
ll barely make three million this year.... so it looks as if we\rquote ll not make any profit at all.. I don\rquote t think.. and we are a co-operative and we pay our members a bonus 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par according to the business they do with us, that\rquote s all supposing we er, we make some money...  it\rquote ll mebbe come, mebbe come... There\rquote 
s one thing it did enable us to do, it enabled us to make a lot of decisions that we were frightened to do before, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Really
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par you know, we\rquote ve, we\rquote ve, there\rquote s no way we could\rquote ve made that salesman redundant because he\rquote s so well respected he\rquote d been with me, well I\rquote d, I\rquote 
d worked with him for forty years, er, you know, we worked together at West Cumberland Farmers before, but you know, he\rquote d got past his sell-by-date, er he just couldn\rquote t cope with modern agriculture
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  and, and, new methods, and new, new, new thinking, so, it enabled us to do that, er we were always, we\rquote re always practice fortnightly calling on farms .. which was ec}{\i\insrsid5511813 (onomic),}{\insrsid5511813  uneconomic really, but we hadn
\rquote t the courage to say we aren\rquote t coming every fortnight, well that, you know once we started back calling again, we made the rules. So like we\rquote 
re only coming once a month, which meant we could cover twice as many people with er, with the same number of, with two salesmen, so that was, that was a good point er... I\rquote m, I\rquote m still on half pay so that\rquote s another, (laughs), but I
\rquote m past retirement age you see, I should\rquote ve retired you know, I\rquote ll be sixty eight this year but nobody wanted me to retire. I didn\rquote t particularly want to retire, the directors said there\rquote 
s no way you can go and a lot of customers said the same thing so, I was quite happy and during the summer I just, I worked \lquote til lunchtime so, it was nice to come home when the sun was shining 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par and get some work done in the garden, so I didn\rquote t disenjoy part-time, but since the weather\rquote s bad now, I, I work all day now ....er.... another excellent thing that from us  I mean we\rquote ve got you know a lot of bad debt... 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par you know as people, we were quite lenient with our credit control, cos we can afford we, we have a positive cash flow, we\rquote ve qu
ite significant amount of money in the bank so we could be more, probably more lenient than other people... Being a co-operative we think it\rquote s, well our Chairman thinks it\rquote 
s our business to help people... so we had quite a big debtor ledger, and some of it I suspect we\rquote d never have got in, because you know as they get more stock they\rquote d need more feed.  And then you can\rquote 
t, instead of only a thousand pound they wanted five and then it became seven and then it became ten, and you know somebody owed you twenty thousand it, it didn\rquote t set the alarm bells ringing
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Really, there were amounts as big as that
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh yeah, one chap when foot and mouth came owed us eighty five thousand quid er, he\rquote d two hundred and fifty cows but er, he had a very bad winter two winters ago
 and ran out of crop in February and had to buy everything so you know never recovered....Most of them give em their due as soon as they got foot and mouth they rang me up and said you know \'93thanks for helping us as soon as we get our compensation we
\rquote ll come in and we\rquote ll have a, we\rquote ll have a settle up\'94 so we, we reached agreement with them on the credit charges and, we got a significant stock of money... and that was a good point....that\rquote s one point in its favour...

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Did it bring in extra business with things like cleaning agents, were you involved in selling any of that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, we, we sold a lot of disinfectant, yeah, but initially we had a problem sourcing it because of course I think it probably happened one week when it really took off, when the rules said you know, you had to disinfect everybody
\rquote s running round looking for it . So for, for two or three days the manufacturers just couldn\rquote t cope, I mean, we sent a lorry down to Stoke one Friday night, just for two hundred, five litres of disinfectant, er, 
some of the manufacturers took advantage, I mean we got a fax from a company in Leeds one day, offering citric acid in twenty five kilo bags, it\rquote 
s quite, quite expensive but the, nobody else had any so, yes we took advantage of it and er, they probably would\rquote ve never dealt with us, so I suspect some of the bigger chemical companies would make, make quite a killing.... \lquote 
Course the trouble is when it suddenly stops, when you stocks of this very expensive foot and mouth disinfectant, you know you might never sell it again. Hopefully there\rquote 
s never going to be another outbreak but er, we may never sell it again... but you see you\rquote ve got to sell a lot of disinfectant to compensate 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yeah
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par for er, for ten thousand tonnes of fertiliser... although it was very, quite profitable, you know, but er, in monetary terms its not .. money\rquote s insignificant...
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 When you were hearing about people going down there must have been people that you knew well...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, I mean we, we work in a very tight area round Aspatria, I suspect twenty mile radius would cover all our clients, so you know, we\rquote re on first name terms and we\rquote 
re socialising with many of them. And having worked in the area for .... well .... in the Cockermouth area since 1960 you know, I mean we\rquote re on first name terms with most people, in fact its quite funny I\rquote m at work and people\rquote 
ll come in and they\rquote ll say to me er, \'93who\rquote s that chap again?\'94 and I\rquote ll say \'93which chap?\'94 
\par \'93 oh little fella who wears flat cap and glasses you know, with wellingtons on, well you know him he\rquote s from\'94...... and they\rquote re frightened to ask him his name but they know I\rquote ll know him and sometimes I \lquote 
ll ...(inaudible 124) no, no I don\rquote t, I\rquote ve never seen him before and put the alarm bells and he says 
\par \'93ah go on,  of course you do\'94.  But even my assistant now had been there for three years and he was saying
\par  \'93who\rquote s that from so and so?\'94, and you have to say \'93he\rquote s related to, he\rquote s his brother-in-law so be careful so if you quote him you\rquote ve got to quote him\'94
. I mean this is something you build up over, over many many years, but we started, I mean, because I\rquote ve had chemotherapy and I wasn\rquote t that, that active I suppose and things were a bit of a, er, a bit of a burden I suspect any extra jobs, I
\rquote d find them a bit of a burden.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  As I say our Chairman was the first person to get it in the Solway Plain and, and I tried to ring him two or three times to say how sorry I was because again, I\rquote m on, we\rquote re on close personal terms and I class him as an e
xtremely good friend, I mean, and I could never get through, and never get through, and when I\rquote 
d got home at night I mean, I was so,  I was shattered, and I just used to, make for bed with a book you see, so I never got in touch with him for three or four 
days and eventually he rang me up and er, you know, pass condolences to one another and er, he said 
\par \'93what are you doing about contacting people?\'94, well I said \'93the salesmen are ringing most of their customers again but er, and I\rquote m speaking to as many as I can, why?\'94. he said 
\par \'93well, since we\rquote ve got it I\rquote ve had letters and phone calls from people I didn\rquote t know I\rquote d never met before\'94
, people who obviously knew you know, (name 1) from Aiklegill (?) quite a prominent farmer, knew his father very well, he said t
here were people ringing up sending cards, you know. So kind.. you know, leaving parcels at the road end because he and his wife, when it broke out I mean they never left home, .....a month before they got it they were never out of the house, they lived a
 mile down a lane, no entry, no way out, just down to Aiklegill  and they never left, couldn\rquote t believe how they got it, so, so well, well what should I do about it, he said 
\par \'93I think, he said I think you should send a letter\'94, and was thinking, you know I felt no more l like composing a letter to somebody who\rquote s, who\rquote s just gone down with foot and mouth. So I says Okay then I\rquote ll, I\rquote 
ll write one tonight so I came home and I composed it, I must have been in the mood because it just flowed and, you know it was just, so I sent it. I faxed it down to him and er, we met in the middle of the road actually, he wouldn\rquote 
t come in, so I went and handed it over, over the wall to him, er yes, he said 
\par \'93That\rquote s fine\'94, so after that we used to get off the website every morning, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par R used to bring it down, the next outbreaks, and the ones that we knew we used to, we sent them one of these letters, addressing personally, R used to do it on the computer, you know personalising Dear bill, Dear Bob, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par the family, and we got quite a few nice little notes back, from people saying you know, \'93thanks for your letter it was very kind of you to send it..\'94 And we\rquote ve got, we\rquote re at three hundred and thirty six.. before we\rquote 
d finished.... And that didn\rquote t take account of the culled people that was just people who had actually had foot and mouth 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Just the infection
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par Yeah, yeah..
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s over, over a third of cases isn\rquote t it?}{\cs20\b\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  of the cases of confirmed infection in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumbria}
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}}}{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, were cu
stomers of ours...... so it was er, very very sad, and the salesmen, the salesmen ...we had a salesman you know it was a bit emotional, I suppose Andrew, I suspect Andrew was in tears many many times, because what, it... you know if you\rquote 
re only dealing with one or two people its quite easy, but we\rquote d these three hundred and thirty odd people and invariably they\rquote d be ringing up and, you know it was quite emotional for us because we had to talk to them, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par We had to sympathise with them, we\rquote d ask them is there anything you want, can we do anything for you, you know and that was every, almost every minute of the day there was somebody who\rquote d be phoning on the phone,..yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Do you think they, they saw you as somebody they could talk to?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well, I think they do.  They\rquote re doing that now, I mean seeing how important, I\rquote d a chap in this afternoon and I mean, I\rquote m sure they just used to come in for a, for a chat and, and advice I suppose, I mean we\rquote 
re just lay people, we don\rquote t, we\rquote re not clever, like, Bachelors of Science or anything like that, we\rquote ve been around a long time
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm Yeah  
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  You know, you sense, you say the right things to the right people.  You know, one\rquote s you can joke with, you know one\rquote s you can bully and you know the one\rquote s can be serious or, or er, whatever, so I\rquote 
m sure they used to just ring up for a chat. I mean even now they\rquote ll say
\par  \'93what do you think we should do? you know, do you think we should go back into milk, or, just\'94\'85 I\rquote ve a chap today, I\rquote ve just finished writing my diary today, and I just been this afternoon. I\rquote 
ve been taking a salad to lunch and I just about to put it out on the plate, when he walked through the door, (laughter) oh lunchtime, oh aye, d\rquote you like a cuppa coffee, 
\par \'93aye I\rquote d love a cuppa coffee\'94, his son was with him as well, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par He\rquote d brought a sample of hay in, to see if we could sell some hay for him, and he\rquote d sit for an hour and talk away, a great talker er, and he\rquote 
d go away and, patted my back as he walked out. see you then, and just walked away, and er, we\rquote ve a lot of pals like that... so it was it was hard work and erm, we\rquote d come home drained most nights. I mean }{\insrsid9646938 [wife]}{
\insrsid5511813  used to say well, you know 
\par \'93you never talk when you come home\'94, I ses I\rquote ve well I\rquote ve been talking all day...yeah, roughly the same story you know. Then of course we used to get all the stories of injustices about how somebody\rquote 
s cattle had been valued at twice the price of theirs, you know,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That must have been tricky if you knew all the people involved
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 A\rquote course they tell you. I mean when you get close to people like that they tell you things they shouldn\rquote t. Almost tell you how much they\rquote ve been valued at, and, they respect, well they hope, they know it won\rquote 
t go any farther, but everybody tells you that you know, so knowledge is, and information that sitting there.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 I mean I suppose you would know a lot about people\rquote s business anyway, but that, that\rquote s another
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, its another
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Dimension  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Another dimension yeah, they won\rquote t be (inaudible 183) there before,
 you know. If you know how much er, you know, you soon work out, he said I got a hundred and eighty pound for my ewes and lambs and I got so much for my dairy cows and you know how many he had, and you soon realise that the cheque he got was about three q
uarters of a million.......(pause)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 You mentioned your wife there, how you didn\rquote t talk when you
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Never do (laughter)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 But 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I\rquote m not getting into home things }{\i\insrsid5511813 (said in fun)
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 You don\rquote t have to tell me all this, I just wondered how it had affected her, whether you think it did affect her as well
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Er........ I suppose she, she knew, you know like me she\rquote d got to know quite a lot of them personally and, when I\rquote d come in she\rquote d say, you know 
\par \'93who\rquote s had it, you know anybody we knows had it today.?\'94.. and if they rang up I mean }{\insrsid9646938 [wife]}{\insrsid5511813  answered the phone, and if }{\insrsid9646938 IB}{\insrsid5511813  ringing up and I wasn\rquote 
t in or something she\rquote d have a chat, not, not seriously affected I wouldn\rquote t think.....
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Were your children aware of it, did they ask you about it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well they\rquote re away from home, as you know (inaudible 195)
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par I just wondered with {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} being on the news all the time.}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par I suspect in the first six months, I mean they were more concerned about my  health than er, yer no,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes, yes at that time
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I think it was (inaudible 197) more important, and er
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 I\rquote m just going to stop this a mo\rquote  because that\rquote s flashing up (change battery)
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 So where were we at, you were asking how it\rquote d affected }{\insrsid9646938 [wife]}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And about your children, that they were
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 The children yes,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That you thought they\rquote d be more concerned about you really
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, well they\rquote d been away at school and at university and I suppose, er, they wouldn\rquote t know the people who got foot and mouth as well as I, as well as }{\insrsid9646938 [wife]}{\insrsid5511813  and I did .... So er, I don
\rquote t think they were, certainly not as much affected as if we\rquote d been living on a farm or working one.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 How about your social life?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well, it, it did a bit I suppose, I mean I didn\rquote t have a drink from the seventh of, sixth of Ju, our son was married, he\rquote s, well he, he was married last August to }{\insrsid3368406 C}{\insrsid5511813 
 but that was a sort of a ..... it was a shotgun visa, (laughter)  Cos her visa was running out, and they were advised that the only way, she\rquote d be sure of getting a visa (inaudible 208) was to get married. So they got married (inaudible208) on the 
nineteenth of August last year, but, it was done in the Registry Office and we had a reception here. But, so they always said we\rquote d have a, we\rquote 
d have ano, it was always going to be the fifth of January initially so, on the fifth of January they had a church blessing ... So and, when the specialist said he wanted me to have a, a course of chemotherapy, said right well I\rquote 
m not going to start \lquote til the seventh of January, I got to get the fifth of January out of the way. So and that was a, that was my last drink
 was the wedding. I never had another drink for sixth months.. So we never went out very much afterwards but we\rquote d always with IB and quite a lot of them, we, we\rquote d visit one another\rquote 
s houses for supper and that, and then that would just, you know just, just like banned ... I mean, all the local shows, were cancelled, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par We\rquote d exhibit, we\rquote d exhibit at two shows, so I mean that was a great social, social day out, although it was work, it was, it was nice
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par You kno
w, cos we used to make people cups of tea and just  it was a socialising day really, and every Tuesday I used to go to Wigton auction just on my lunch hour really, did a little bit of business but not very much. But it was really, used to go and have a cu
p of coffee with mebbe half a dozen or eight farmers in the little snug at Wigton auction, but of course that that stopped, and I think its starting next Tuesday. So I\rquote 
d miss all the, all the people there you know, er, and I used to have about eight or ten 
pet farms that I used to call on once a month and collect their money and, more of a social call really, I was back on one of the farms last week for the first time, since last February..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s a lot of social contact
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, you miss, you miss that, yeah... I mean, a couple of my good friends \lquote ud be in their eighties.  I mean good farmer customers of mine, you know what I mean. And I haven\rquote 
t seen them, but its not the with a telephone, used to go there once a month and have a cup of tea with them and coup
le of hours chat ... I mean it was a break for me from work and it was also, you know, different conversation... and people would often ring up and say come out and quote me for fertiliser, or, it was all to do on the \lquote 
phone so, some people you never saw. J (inaudible 231) particularly good friend of mine and his son,  I saw him ...just before Christmas and I usually get him some whisky and a calendar and diary and you know, is it alright if I come D? he ses, \'93
yes, its fine, you know, you haven\rquote t been on another farm, for a week\'94, I say yes that\rquote s fine, and that was the first time I\rquote d seen him for, for ten months, just like seeing, well welcome home (laughter)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 And his wife, D\rquote s wife, Jt, she\rquote s a, a lovely lady, and she said er, and she always used to keep asking how I was you know, whenever she was on the \lquote phone. 
\par \'93how are you J?\'94, oh I\rquote m fine, \'93yer sure now, yer not just saying it are you now?\'94, no no I\rquote m fine J thanks, and when I went she said \'93I can\rquote t get over how well you look, gosh you don\rquote t half look well\'94
 she said, \'93sit down and have a cuppa tea and a piece of cake with me (inaudible 238) I can\rquote t get over how well you look\'94
, you know. So, she said it about eight or ten times, yer embarrassing me J please stop, and that was the sort of relationship you really miss 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And I suppose that made life a bit dull at work then, \lquote cos that breaks up the hard work when you can just jump in the car and say I\rquote m off to see G 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And I\rquote m off to see D or summat like that, you know where I am if you want me.  I mean I haven\rquote t got a mobile \lquote phone because I believe in, my staff won\rquote t make decisions if they know they can reach me, so I haven\rquote 
t got one, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 (laughter) Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par But I usually tell them where I\rquote m going and if there\rquote s anything serious they know where, where they can ring me. And it\rquote s just nice, I mean this afternoon I just, slipped out an hour early said I\rquote 
m going to so and so, (inaudible 247) and that was the thing I missed, so you can imagine how our salesmen felt
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  From going fortnightly runs, same time, same place, you know same spot on the dial, be a cup of tea waiting for them, or mebbe their lunch or mebbe their afternoon tea and all of a sudden you know that was, that was stopped ...and certainly they\rquote 
ve, they\rquote ve had a good.. they\rquote ve lost quite a bit of weight ha,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 I wondered if maybe they\rquote d put it on being in the office
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 No they wouldn\rquote t, probably a bit hard\'85 I mean there\rquote 
s no doubt, you know its a great social life because where ever you go farmers are quite hospitable and the first thing they do when you walk in is, the kettle goes on, at least that\rquote 
s my experience anyway, the cakes come out.  And, I mean A, the, the one who\rquote s a bit emotional, first couple of days you would ask how\rquote 
s things gone A, Oh grand he says, grand to get back out again he said er, talking to JT  that was the chap who was in at lunchtime and his wife had said er, by A you\rquote ve put a bit of weight on,  hell. She said, no she said to A}{\insrsid3368406  }{
\insrsid5511813 \'93by your nice and slim A\'94 she says \'93not like my husband he\rquote s got a DEFRA belly\'94 (laughter) ....aye...that\rquote s all I mean its nice to see some of the humour coming back.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Were you involved with DEFRA at all?  Did they give you advice or..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 No, no, the only time we had a visit from anybody we had a chap walked in one day, quite early on shortly after I B, our Chairman, went down with it. This very tall chap came in, quite dignified looking, he says er, I\rquote 
m an inspector from DEF no yer didn\rquote t call it DEF had it, had it changed?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 No it was probably MAFF then was it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 MAFF, aye 
\par \'93I\rquote m an inspector from MAFF, sorry\'94  he says \'93we\rquote ve come to check the book, and yer lorries and er, somebody had reported someone for doing something\'94, so he says \'93I want to check see the movements of such and such a vehicle
\'94, so er, anyway we, we convinced him that we nothing, nothing amiss, and that was the only visit we ever had from anybody, er when he walked in. No, we never er, I never had any contact with them at all,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Would it have helped if they\rquote d kept you informed or did you not feel need (inaudible 272)
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Ahh, I suppose the only contact we had was the website, with, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par With the cases, but er, I think we all felt it was so, badly handled that ther
e was nobody there to give us advice.  I mean a lot of foreigners in the place. I mean I remember coming home one and there was a, a car in behind me obviously lost, and er, and I turned down to (inaudible 278) different route and finally got back and thi
s car was still lost. So I, I stopped and said can I help you she was Spanish, she says, she had a map out, she says, and that\rquote s how I thought she was lost, 
\par \'93Yes I\rquote m looking for so and so,\'94 er it was a farmer who\rquote d just been suspected that day, oh well its just down there, there\rquote s a row of houses there, and its the last one. She said
\par \'93 Excuse me what is a row of houses?\'94 you know (laughter), and I mean it must have been extremely difficult for everybody concerned with this er, I mean its bad enough if they speak English, but if they don\rquote t speak English.. I mean there
\rquote s all these sort of stories coming out ...(laughter).. I mean there\rquote s lots of laughs, I mean, there\rquote s some funny. I mean K I and his brother who were good friends of mine and they were, I think 
they had a suspected case anyway and they were getting a visit from, from the vets periodically.  And this lady vet turned up one day and they\rquote d barricades up. I mean they\rquote 
d got tractor and trailer across the farm entrance, like nobody shall enter, they\rquote d two farms you see, so, this lady vet rode up she said 
\par \'93I want to see your cows\'94, oh no he says, yer not seeing my cows, \'93But I must see your cows\'94, I\rquote m telling you, yer not seeing my cows there\rquote s nobody comes in this farm, I\rquote ll know, I\rquote ll know when I\rquote ve g
ot foot and mouth, you know, so eventually, she insisted, insisted. Eventually he lost his temper and he said a four letter word \lquote off\rquote  you see and points away you see, 
\par \'93Excuse me what is that\'94 (laughter) so, so she says \'93You write it down please\'94, so anyway he wrote it and he got a very severe reprimand from (inaudible 296)........ No I mean it does erm....
\par What I think should have happened, I mean there was lots, lots of people with a lot of knowledge, like myself who\rquote d been around {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 a long time. And if somebody had come into me, you know Mr Fix it, \'93do you know anybody who\rquote s got a lorry?\'94 or \'93do you know any body whose got a digger?\'94 or  \'93do you know any body who could do this?\'94  I mean there\rquote 
s lots of them in the county would have known that. And I think if that, quite early on they\rquote d got hold of somebody and said \'93Right, you\rquote re in charge\'94
, I think that. You said what happened in nineteen sixty seven, I think, that was then a person in charge. It was the local er the vet, DVO for,
 for the county and he was full of local knowledge, you know,.He knew where to go for a lorry, he knew where to go for a digger, you see one of the big problems is the local contractors with the diggers, they were barred out because it was national, natio
nal contractors, and the national contractors wouldn\rquote t give them any work, there was people sitting with the necessary equipment never turned a wheel, urm, \lquote cos it\rquote 
d all been given to people like Snowie and yeah, he was looking after his own. And you know, if they had to wait a week to get the people or get a digger well so be it. Now if somebody, well somebody like Nick Utting}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn 
{\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  NCumbria NFU secretary}}}{
\insrsid5511813  I suppose you know, there that knows the area, who\rquote s a bit of, well its like the Brigadier when he came in, I mean he, he needed somebody like him right from the start
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 They }{\b\i\insrsid5511813 ( the army)}{\b\insrsid5511813  seemed to use the local knowledge didn\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par They brought it in
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, they knew, they asked people, you know, they soon realised. I suppose the army\rquote s like that, I mean, they use every  er, every source that\rquote s available..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 It came up a lot at that meeting didn\rquote t it last week at Penrith?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That there , well a lot of people there at that table
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I mean instances early on, I mean, nobody would make a decision without ringing London I mean, people used to say, the vet would come in he\rquote d say yeah just a minute I\rquote 
ll ring London. And you know, and hour, two hours on the \lquote phone, well what does anybody in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} know about the situation..... You know they
\rquote d have been far better, far better getting a local supremo, or, or three or four or how many it took to cover the county, and there was enough of,  there were enough of people around, who had, who had common sense, and knew where to look for t
hings and where to find things, knew where to find equipment....
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 As a business you, you\rquote ve said that there\rquote ve been some positive things like the clearing of debts and that kind of thing, and changed a bit, can you think of anything (inaudible 327)
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, well it certainly made us think, you know way ahead, I think, we were, well we were relatively successful and I joined in 1986, I mean the first year we lost fourteen hundred pound and we would\rquote 
ve been bankrupt I suppose, with a, in another year if, if, I hadn\rquote t pulled it round, I hadn\rquote 
t turned up. We now have over a million pound in the bank, on deposit at the bank at the moment, you know , quite, quite wealthy, but if foot and mouth hadn\rquote t happened I suspect we were just going to go, you know,  just meand
ering on, not that ambitious, all of a sudden the Directors realised, that, you know, things might not be the same again, you know, people making all sorts of noises about changing agriculture and the way its funded and, various grants, and all of a sudde
n people (inaudible 338) we\rquote re going to have to change the way we operat. We\rquote re part of a federal, based in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Devon{\*\xmlclose}
, group called United Farmers which is, looks after all the co-operatives, initially it was formed to look after em in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Scotland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} but they
\rquote ve, they\rquote ve now picked people like ourselves and Furness and {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}South Cumberland{\*\xmlclose}, er Farmway across in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Darlington{\*\xmlclose}
. And their chief executive was a consultant, so we used, and he offered his services, I mean he was very sympathetic to, to us, and er you know so he\rquote d been very highly, 
\par \'93Can I help you in any way?\'94 so it was then we said well, you know, if we\rquote re going to change we\rquote d probably need one or two brainstorming sessions and, so he came down and we had three or four brainstormi
ng sessions.  Well we just got round a table in a, in a small hotel and said \'93Right\'94, you know,... blackboard and easel up, so you\rquote ll know all about that at university, anyway we\rquote 
d flip chart up and say right where do we go from here, you know, what we going to do? And, oh we, we drew a five year plan up, something we\rquote 
d never done before, but we need to do, and er, what steps would it take to get back to where we were previously. So it yeah, it certainly made us think... hard about, and that\rquote s why we\rquote ve tak
en a different type of salesman on, a feed specialist 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par because we realised we got to become a little bit, better at what we do, farmers are going to change, there aren\rquote t going to be as many, there going to be bigger, and more informed...
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Do you get the feeling they see it like that as well..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 The directors?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 The farmers.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh, the farmers do, yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Is that the sort of feedback you\rquote re getting?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, yeah they\rquote re going bigger. I mean the peoples going into back into milk are going back into milk with more cows, erm\'85 There won\rquote t be any more cows kept, but they\rquote 
ll be in fewer hands. And we have a, a driver who was in this morning and he, he takes concrete panels which are made at Aspatria, all over the UK really, and he\rquote s just saying that they\rquote 
ve taken them panels to a big, to a big dairy complex as has been built, er, I think one\rquote s just outside Worcester and one outside Northampton I think. And they\rquote re both going 
to milk over eight hundred cows, just like a new, a new dairy city they\rquote re building........ and I B, our Chairman, his son farms in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Oxford{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and he
\rquote s just put a big new milking parlour and er, and brand new buildings up and he, he could milk eight hundred cows ...so..and there, they\rquote ll probably will get their youngstock reared elsewhere, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I mean I\rquote s looking at the possibility mebbe of rearing youngstock for his, for his son-in-law, so they specialise in producing milk and somebody else er,
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par  (inaudible 370)}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par  you know we\rquote re seeing cases like that round about whereas, he\rquote s said 
\par \'93I\rquote m not going back into milk I\rquote ve made arrangements with so and so I\rquote m going to rear his, his replacements for him\'94, so you\rquote ve, there\rquote s a bit more co-operation in that, 
aspect. Some people who were in beef, milk and sheep before foot and mouth will say 
\par \'93Well we\rquote re not going back into beef, we\rquote ll go into milk\'94 and vice versa ..... so there\rquote s no doubt there\rquote s change, I mean a lot of people, last year when they couldn't do 
anything else with their land, when all their stock had gone, ploughed it out and sew barley and grew barley and, aye, a chap who was in today, I think he said, he\rquote s going to do that for a year or two \lquote 
til he sees what, what happens...Just up the Laithes there was three brothers there, I mean, there were, they\rquote d milked a lot of cows not in the best of buildings, they never used to be finished \lquote 
til breakfast time about half past ten and they were milking \lquote til half past ten, a way of life with them, and er, they\rquote ve found a different way of life now. Because they\rquote ve no sons coming on they\rquote ve said 
\par \'93well we\rquote ll go into arable and, and fat cattle for five years, until one of the sons grows up and  just see if they still want it..\'94  Milk price is coming down they m
ay never go back into milk again..... so there, there are changes afoot, but you\rquote ve got to be able to cope with all those, you\rquote ve got to have people who can do it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 It sounds as though, right the way through even when you were losing customers, you kept qu
ite a degree of control over that as  regards business, whereas some other people say the farmers found that they, they had no control over things, do you think that\rquote s the case?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, I\rquote m sure it is, yeah, I mean they were told what, you know. I mean fortunately all our customers didn\rquote t, didn\rquote t go down, I mean had we been trading south of Cockermouth we\rquote 
d have been okay cos nobody went.  You know it stopped at Cockermouth, er, unfortunately we hadn\rquote t much business down there but, we have a sister co-operative down in }{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  southernmost part of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname 
country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Cumbria}{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}}}{\insrsid5511813 Furness who got away lightly really, you know
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Is that Broughton and Furness Supply?}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par Furness, South Cumberland Supply Association, I mean, we, we work very closely together.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Oh yeah
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par And I\rquote 
m very, close friends with L F the Manager there. I mean he only had about four or five customers got it so I mean they were relatively er, unharmed....and similarly ?Valley Castle Douglas, we also have very close relationship with, with (inaudible 405) V
alley which is another co-operative and, because they trade all along the south of Scotland from Dumfries right to Stranraer, and up to Ayr. I mean, certain areas they were quite severely affected but, generally they\rquote 
ve traded normally as well, so.... I suspect of all of them we were most severely, severely hit, because of the tight area we, we worked in......
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Do you think the fact that you\rquote ve been ill, that you were having treatment, gave you a different view of it, did it say put it in perspective?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh, I\rquote m certain it did, yeah, yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Do you think you might have been affected differently..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh I think I would\rquote ve worried an awful lot more if er, if I hadn\rquote t, hadn\rquote t had other worries... I think, maybe the fact that I\rquote d seen, things like that before, I 
mean had I been a thirty year old manager there I mean, I would have been devastated at the loss of business but, I think you\rquote re more philosophical as you get older, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par you know you\rquote ve seen things like that happen before and you saw the crisis in 1973 when livestock prices collapsed, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par and I suspect people who were alive in 1930 saw it all, saw it , you know, all happen before so.. its like if you lose an order at my age you, you know, its not the end of the world, but as a thirty year old, it would have been a total disast, I mean I
\rquote d never have slept, I\rquote m, I\rquote m certain if, if I\rquote d been virile }{\i\insrsid5511813 (sic)}{\insrsid5511813  and just starting my career, I would\rquote 
ve been, I would have been devastated.... and the end of the world... still have these, you look around, keep your head down and somebody\rquote ll find a solution..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I know some, a lot of my colleagues were more worried than I was, I mean, I suppose if I\rquote d lost my job, I was past retirement age anyway, so it, you know, would\rquote ve been hard but, it wouldn\rquote t have been as, as se
rious as some of the other ones who..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And were you having to listen to their worries, did that, did that give you any trouble at all or do you think talking to..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Er, er we\rquote re not that sort of company really, I mean, you know, we\rquote re very close and we\rquote ve got a, its like a family our business but, we don\rquote t sit down and talk very much, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I suspect we\rquote re too busy really, 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par Yes}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par you know, its head down when you go at eight o\rquote clock in the morning and its head down \lquote til five a clock and you don\rquote t go out to lunch and you sit and work round it, and at the end of the day say \'93Aye cheerio Paul\'94
, and goodnight I mean some of em go off and don\rquote t even say goodnight, but, our Christmas party which we have every year it \lquote s just like a, big er, family party, you know, its, er, I\rquote m certain they\rquote d all fight they\rquote 
d all die for one another but,... giving much away.........
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 No
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  but I\rquote m, the one, I mean A the salesman I mean he, he felt, he felt it terribly, \lquote cos he, he got close to his customers and he, a bit emotional, and he hasn\rquote 
t seen as much of life as, as some of the older ones have. I mean RJ, my colleague and he\rquote s been made redundant so I mean you know he\rquote s made redundant from his previous company so I mean he\rquote s changed companies quite a few times, so I
 mean R, probably had seen it before, you know, Andrew hadn\rquote t, er, The girls.. I\rquote m not sure about the girls really, you know, your not sure whether its a career or its just a stepping stone, they\rquote 
ll get married and leave anyway........No, I think it was only A who\rquote s really er, reasonably emotionally upset and, and I know probably the only time when he\rquote 
s ever confided in me, when he, well we took him off the road and put him inside, and I said, and you can keep your car providing you can put your own fuel in, you know you may as well keep the car \lquote cos we, we wouldn\rquote 
t sell it so, .. he said, oh he said 
\par \'93That\rquote s good because me and\rquote   wife had said I wonder if they\rquote ll take the car off you A\'94,  (laughs) and he was buying a house and he\rquote d just got married again, s
o I susp, well I suspect he was quite worried........... and we\rquote ve got the other salesman who was made redundant, he er, he got a job with DEFRA so he was, he was an inspector with DEFRA so he did very well.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 It seemed to happen with a lot of people..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 He made a lot of money and he didn\rquote t show us any sympathy he didn\rquote t come back and say here\rquote s my redundancy pay back, or you can have your car back, I\rquote 
m making a fortune with DEFRA, and the minute he was paid off with DEFRA  he\rquote s going round telling all his customers as we haven\rquote t offered him his job back, ha, ha.. and we\rquote ve never seen him from the day he, the day he left ....aye..

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 How long had he been with you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well he joined me in 1990 er, but previous to that he worked for West Cumberland Farmers and he worked for me, he (inaudible 476) from 1960 so, I knew him a long time... 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Ah right
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par He had quite a severe car accident about er, well in 1989 he\rquote d got back from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and he must have been suffering with jetlag and he was in a coma for
 three, for three months.  And before that he was, he was extremely sharp and greedy, and mean salesman who was very very good but, he was seriously affected. Iit affected his walk and affected his speech a little bit, and he was made redundant by WCF but
 he was still\'85 and even though he was only working seventy five percent of his previous skills he was still, you know good enough for me, \lquote cos I hadn\rquote t anybody at the time. I hadn\rquote 
t a salesman so he came and joined me. And brought a lot of business with him because he was very well, er, very well respected and liked and, he\rquote d a good way with children and the farmer\rquote s wives, but as things progressed he, he didn\rquote 
t progress with it. I mean he, his ability to learn or to take information in, just wasn\rquote t there, a
nd I suspect it was something to do with his accident and he still, you know he, he still slurred his speech, anybody who knew him accepted it but he couldn\rquote 
t go on to a new farm because, they probably thought he was half drunk, half the time he just had that way.. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par So.. as I say he\rquote d, he\rquote d got past his sell by date.....but anyway he\rquote s now got a job as an agent with Pye\rquote 
s, given us a little bit of a hard time so (laughs) we spend all our time at the moment defending the er, the action we took,.......
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Is that the only case of hard feelings, cos it must have been difficult for you...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh, it was, I mean, twas, it was serious having to, having to make him redundant, I mean, I can still, 
\par \'93Does that mean I\rquote ve got to go now?\'94,... I mean, although, I was, I was quite serious when I said I\rquote d though long and hard and hadn\rquote t slept very much for a week, to come to the decision. And er, I don\rquote 
t know whether he believed me, but it was difficult, especially when I knew he\rquote d have difficulty because of his impediment getting er, getting another job. But you see he\rquote 
d no skill, I mean Andrew, the other salesman, he could drive a forklift, he could drive a lorry and he\rquote d been a warehouseman so, you know you could immediately find a position for him.  J was, couldn\rquote t operate a computer, we couldn\rquote 
t even bring him into the farm shop because you know, he just, he couldn\rquote t operate a computer he couldn\rquote t drive a forklift he couldn\rquote t lift a bag because of his,.. so I mean he was just er, really unemployable,... he enjoyed washin
g cars, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par Disinfecting cars 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par But that didn\rquote t make you any money, er,...... and we knew, we knew, we had an idea at that time that we were going to change the way we operated, and that we\rquote d have to do monthly calling instead of fortnightly calling which means you\rquote 
ve going to have to, if he\rquote d had one hundred and twenty customers he\rquote d have to have two hundred and forty, and there was no way he was going to pick up a hundred and twenty new customers he just, he just couldn\rquote t do it, he just hadn
\rquote t the confidence so, or the ability to go cold calling, so, there was no future..............aye.....
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Is there anything we haven\rquote t covered do you think?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 I mean I suppose looking back we should\rquote ve done what a lot of other companies did they\rquote d gone to DEFRA and said 
\par \'93please can we form a cleaning gang\'94, cos that\rquote s what most of our competitors did
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Really!
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s where some of the cleaning gangs came from?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, yeah, yeah.. Tynedale Farm Services, they set a cleaning gang up, there\rquote s quite a few people run farm groups round about, the secretaries 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par and they bring people together as buying groups 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par and two or three of them set, er, set cleaning gangs up, yeah, they would make a lot of money yeah....If we\rquote d thought about it we could maybe have done the same sort of thing. but really we wouldn\rquote 
t ha had the time to make, making four people redundant 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813  
\par and you know you\rquote ve got eight staff and they all get a month\rquote s holiday 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yeah
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par you know for eight months a year you\rquote re short of one person, so even if you\rquote ve not done much business, I mean, we\rquote re still doing business and we\rquote 
re still doing business with most people I mean it was a different type of business 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 (tape changes sides) 
\par }{\insrsid5511813  processing document,  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par so you still got the same volume of (inaudible 555) but not the quantity
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Not the same income for it
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 So you know we kept fairly busy, but didn\rquote t know how much you were scared of (inaudible 557) we must have had plenty of work to do.  Every telephone call took a long time you know, oh hello there, how ya doing? 
\par \'93Well I\rquote m not so bad\'94, how\rquote s?
\par \'93 oh well she\rquote s not so bad, you know, well oh you know just didn\rquote t get up \lquote til {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 8}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}
}}eight o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} in the morning and\'94, you know,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 They want to tell you
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  They want to tell you all their problems...
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Is that still happening a bit or do you think people are looking forward now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Oh I still think there\rquote s, there\rquote s still a little bit of reaction, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I think the biggest reaction still is to the, to the better deal that some people have got, I mean it still, it still niggles, yeah it still niggles, yeah... I mean a, mean a group that we, that we knock around with, I mean, there\rquote 
s six or eight farmers in that group and, a few of them have had it. And I B got it first of all and he was one of the lucky ones, he was first, and when I had his valuation done, I won\rquote t say too much, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 No
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I mean, when he had his valuation done he had somebody from MAFF , represent MAFF, he had a vet he had an auctioneer, he\rquote 
d a valuer, and he had somebody else. There was five people there and they inspected every animal, checked all their herd numbers, you know, checked their teeth to see what age the cattle.  You couldn\rquote t say that\rquote 
s a heifer because, just open the mouth and says \'93well she\rquote s got six teeth, tisn\rquote t a heifer\'94
, so there was no way he, he could get the wrong value for anything and they placed each calf with each cow you know, and.  But after that, I mean we had cases where the valuers never went to see the animals, you know. They just used to say 
\par \'93How many ewes have you got J?\'94 well I\rquote ve got a hundred, do you want to come and see them, \'93no\'94 he says \'93I\rquote ve sold your sheep before I know what sort of sheep would a hundred and eighty be alright?\'94
 you know, this sort of thing.  And of course farmers being farmers I mean, you know they speak out and when they\rquote re in the pub and they tell these things. And of course somebody whose been badly done to hearing and, like still, sti
ll lingers  but I see, I\rquote ve just put in a report, | see there\rquote s a case just started in the High Court today where one of our customers has taken er, DEFRA to court er, because they er, for fourteen day rule, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par he wasn\rquote t given the opportunity of er, he was three days late in putting his objections in and er, come, I see its, er, High Court, and they said there\rquote s about seven hundred others waiting in the wings to see if, what the result is..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Cos not everybody had all the information did they?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 No, I mean they were shellshocked.  I mean initially you know, they didn\rquote t know what was, somebody says you\rquote ve got fourteen days to\'85its like if somebody comes and says you can change your gas supply and you\rquote 
ve got fourteen days to change, and you think well, you never think about do you, \lquote til its like two weekends in between or, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 A lot, lot of people have said they often didn\rquote t know what day of the week it was
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 You know when the routine changes like that
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, no auction to got to, no, if they went to an auction a week on a Tuesday at least Tuesday was always, er,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And when you\rquote re shut in and not seeing the postman
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s right, yeah, yeah, no chat and just one day runs into another, I know IB didn\rquote t, he\rquote s one of, he\rquote s one of them as didn\rquote t er, he didn\rquote t object in time, er, he\rquote 
s at least fifty thousand worse off than what he would have been, it money, that\rquote s the bottom line (laughs), yeah...... I mean, I don\rquote t know, we we\rquote ve certainly been involved in a lo
t of extra costs.  I mean, I think of all the disinfectant used on all the vehicles and say that salesman did nothing else for three months except, er disinfect vehicles coming in and out. Er, double journeys, time wasting you know, you couldn\rquote 
t get on a farm so you\rquote d to meet them at the lonning}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  lane}}}{\insrsid5511813 
 end. Telephone calls ringing up to arrange the deliveries you know, a lot of, a lot of extra work, if we could quantify it. I mean, we\rquote ve had visits from various people about applying for grants, quite early
 on we rang up to see, long before they got the documents, were even printed. Er \lquote cos we\rquote d heard about the grants that were available for businesses, small businesses that had been affected and, we\rquote 
d a visit from an advisor from Workington and I think the maximum we\rquote d get was six thousand pounds, for one, under one scheme and two thousand under another. But you had to actually show the invoice where you\rquote d spent, where you\rquote 
d spent it, you know, we could probably have got a website done, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par as part of it but, we, the forms you\rquote d to fill in, I mean, and balance sheets I mean, and at that time I mean, it hadn\rquote t affected our business at that time, because we\rquote d a very good first six months, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par and we were heading for a record year, and if we\rquote d, put our latest six months figures in at the end of March or the end of April and I mean, he\rquote d have said, you know 
\par \'93what\rquote s, what\rquote s your problem?\'94, you know, you you \'93you\rquote re rolling away\'94 and until er, until July or August, even September nobody would\rquote ve said (inaudible 599) we\rquote 
re still showing an increase over previous years. So it was very difficult justifying, and was it worth it? I mean I\'85  I started and spent two days writing a business plan and that, and a, not worth it, and say oh you\rquote ve got to do it Yeah, yeah,
 yeah, well what do we need.  He says 
\par }{\insrsid3368406 \'93Well, well what do we need}{\insrsid5511813 ?\'94, I says well yeah we could probably have a website and what else can we spend, six thousand pounds, what else can we spend that we, that we, that we can honestly say we need, we
\rquote ve just updated our computer system, a few month before like, er, (inaudible 605) 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 You\rquote ve got to spend it on something haven\rquote t you? You can\rquote t just feed it to\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, Can\rquote t just feed it into the business no, you have, you have to have an invoice, for an item... So w
e, we just, this the application is still in the drawer, and he still keeps ringing up and saying are you not going to send it in, well,... difficult to send it in for something yer don\rquote t really need, and I think that\rquote 
s probably, probably a lot of people, you just, they don\rquote t, its the information they need.....and except if your a big company and you\rquote 
ve got a personnel officer or  a secretary with nothing else you could probably say, you know, its your project for the next week get it done, but, we\rquote ve got to do it in between working
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par They are complex, those forms, aren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well they are really, you know, they want all sorts of information, quite honestly we just haven\rquote t available.... we could make it up I suppose...
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 (laughter)
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 We just tell white lies, we don\rquote t tell (inaudible 613)....What else now,................... the biggest single problem we had, as I said before, all our members who, couldn\rquote 
t, had nothing to eat the grass with, they ploughed, if they got foot and mouth early enough in the season 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Mm
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par so they could  er,change their cropping plans, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par er put arable in, and we got the benefit of the seed sales, you know, but their not professional grain growers in Cumbria, I mean, nobody had the facility, you know, nobody
 had, nobody had any driers, er I mean, the way that they store the grain here if they grow grain, is that they put Propcorn}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  grain additive to prevent mould growth}}}{
\insrsid5511813  on and use it themselves.. Propcorn\rquote s a, to keep it 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par to keep it mould free and then they use it themselves. Well they\rquote ve no cattle so, its very soon obvious that there\rquote s all these acres of grain growing in, and we quickly estimated that if, we had to buy all the grain that\rquote 
s produced from the extra seed we\rquote d sold it was going to come to 
something like three and a half thousand tonnes.  And then, it obvious, if somebody came well we said, once a farmer had foot and mouth got the grain into his buildings he would not be able to move it for at least, four months, you know, until he got, unt
il the whole are was clear or until he\rquote d been clear for four months. And then where was he going to sell it to,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yeah
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par  Who\rquote s he going to sell it to? And how was he going to preserve it? Because none of them had any storage space, you see, er, plus the fact that you\rquote ve got this Farm Assured, problem. You know, if your, if your grain isn\rquote 
t Farm Assured now, a lot of the usual buyers for cereals won\rquote t buy, because they\rquote re, they\rquote re selling feed that\rquote s from Farm Assured raw materials, so there\rquote s no way they can 
buy barley.  So big buyers such as BOC and Bibbys that we would\rquote ve normally sell grain to, weren\rquote t interested because it wasn\rquote t Farm Assured.  So none of them were Farm Assured but because inspections on farms weren\rquote 
t allowed, there\rquote s no way they could get the thing, the organisation to pass them for Farm Assured because (inaudible 633)
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 For the tape can you just say a bit about Farm Assurance?}{\insrsid5511813 
\par 
\par Farm Assurance, yeah, well Farm Assured, well I mean for a, for a while now people like Sainsburys and er, Safeways are now insisting that their, that all their meat and vegetables, whatever they\rquote 
re buying from a farm have got to come from Farm Assured. To get farm, to get Farm Assured status, there\rquote s quite a lot of farmers been Farm Assured for cattle and sheep, that\rquote s quite simply done, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s to do with welfare..
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Welfare, and feeding and regulations, cleanlinesss, and housing and you know, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par that sort of thing, and quite a lot of farmers had already gone that way because, probably two or three
 years ago it looked as if that was the only way you were ever going to be able to sell, sell any animals, er, or meat for human consumption, and then, as, as people like Marks and Spencer and the major buyers started putting more pressure on the feed, on
 the feed suppliers, compounders, and saying like we need our animals have got to be fed
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 This was in the wake of BSE was it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, that\rquote s right, yeah it wasn\rquote t foot and mouth, pre foot and mouth, and it was coming but we didn\rquote t take it very seriously. So 
it was obvious then that the pressure they were putting on was saying to people like BOCM, Silcock BOCM Pauls (inaudible 644) your feed has got to be from Farm Assured raw materials so the, so the pressure was then on to get all raw materials Farm Assured
. Not too difficult with a lot of stuff that\rquote 
s coming in from abroad because you know, that goes into a big silo in Liverpool and, they can quickly get those building specified, more difficult with farmers, who are storing grain, and, and even in our feed store we\rquote ve, we\rquote 
ve having difficulty getting that Farm Assured at the moment, yeah,  its quite, quite tight you\rquote ve got to set the, you\rquote ve got set the system up where you\rquote 
ve got to record every load that comes in, and every load that goes out and if they\rquote re coming in and going out strip loaded. For low, for low cost operations like ours its, its quite difficult, but we\rquote ll have to do it
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I mean, by this September we\rquote ll have to be Farm Assured, so all the grain obviously then, you go back to the farm who, who produces the grain and they say well, you know, we can\rquote t buy your grain unless it\rquote s Farm Assured,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And they couldn\rquote t get the inspectors on?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 They couldn\rquote t get inspectors on, so there was a, there was a bottleneck, you know, just a well where do we go from here,
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 So what happened?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Well, it soon became obvious, they took it straight from a farm, from the field, they bypassed the farm, into a store, right, that was an outlet.  So, it soon became obvious that we were going to have three and a half thousand
 tonne of grain, non-Farm Assured on our hands. , wet grain, you know you come into all sorts of moisture contents because these people have never grown it before and, you know, barley to them was barley, you know, you\rquote 
re talking about moisture content, bushel weights, split grain, it barley, its alright isn\rquote t it, nice sample you know, (laughs), you know yeah yeah it\rquote s alright. So, we made arrangements with a chap at Silloth that we have a straights}{
\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{
\insrsid5511813  unmixed grain/feeds}}}{\insrsid5511813  operation down there in an aircraft hanger and we\rquote 
d made arrangements with a chap there that he would lease a drier and we could have his building. So we, we took out every bit of barley that was offered, so just, we had a great deal of barley, three and a half thousand tonne of barley, non
-Farm Assured, dried down and, and reasonable quality, sitting on our hands, from these, from farmers who, if they\rquote d sold barley before doesn\rquote t matter what the moisture content, would\rquote 
ve got seventy pound or sixty quid or whatever it was. But now they\rquote re saying well, yeah, well its sixty five pound if its sixteen percent moisture but if it comes in at twenty five you\rquote ve got to dry it down so you\rquote 
ve got drying charges, you\rquote ve got a weight loss, so that reduces it and then there\rquote s one pound fifty handling in and out, so you get, you know, mebbe forty eight quid a tonne for it you see.  And oh... just horror on their faces because they
\rquote ve never had, never had to face that situation  before. Cos if they\rquote d any surplus grain they\rquote d send it to another farm and it didn\rquote t matter whether it was eighteen or nineteen percent moisture, it\rquote 
d gone for animal feed.  So we were then faced with er, with that problem,.. so then we had to try to persuade as many farmers as possible to go Farm Assured for this next year because i
ts critical, its critical next year, to have to be Farm Assured. Er, and we are getting quite a lot of them through, erm, we\rquote 
ve introduced them to people who will do it for them, and er, quite a lot who already had their cattle and sheep Farm Assured were (inaudible 675) were able to tag their cereals, their cereals on the back of that, erm, so its getting there
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 (Inaudible 677)
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par Yeah, you see a lot of them might never need it again, because they might never, if they go back into livestock, they\rquote ll probably
 never grow, grow cereals again .... Anyway we had this three and a half thousand tonne of er, cereals to play with and, ha, we\rquote ve, we\rquote ve nearly got it all sold, nearly got it all sold, but just because we\rquote 
ve known an awful lot of people, and because of our relationship with (?Valley )they\rquote ve taken about a thousand tonne, with one or two little things (inaudible 684) so we\rquote 
re down to about four or five hundred tonnes so quite happy with that and that\rquote ll disappear before next time. But that\rquote s been an added problem that we didn\rquote t need fortunately we weren\rquote 
t terribly, terribly busy and we were able to absorb the extra workload
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 I can see that\rquote s caused a lot of extra work
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
Yeah, yeah oh well the driers, the drier operators were working shift work they were working night and day, and the farmers were just, you know heaping it down. Got in a big heap, steam was starting to rise off it, and, you had to move it around. And I me
an we\rquote ll never know until the last tonne goes out whether we\rquote 
ve made any money or whether its cost us a fortune. Because it goes into a big heap, er, when it goes out, when it goes over the weigh bridge it straight to the nearest twenty kilo. Well if you\rquote re
 unlucky and every load that goes out, is, is against you, and you lose ten kilos a load, er, its dried from they\rquote 
re all paid from this set of charges which have been by Newcastle or in the NFU, a set of charges. Every drier use, you know its a scale of ch
arges, but obviously (inaudible 694) but if its, if your driving it from twenty percent down to sixteen percent you\rquote ll lose X percent, and that\rquote s, and the drying charges are all more or less agreed, so it, there\rquote 
s standard deductions and, every load isn\rquote t, isn\rquote t done individually, it\rquote s all, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 Yes
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
\par I mean they\rquote re all tested individually for moisture and then, then someone does the calculation
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And have you paid upfront for all that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 It\rquote s all paid for now yeah, yeah, just paid last week ... really we could\rquote ve paid earlier but we wanted to do the best for our members and we wanted to see what, what it realised. We didn\rquote 
t start selling until about December, we. If we\rquote d paid at the September price we wouldn\rquote t have got very much for it probably, and, it did increase in price and it\rquote 
s now dropped back again. So, you know, its a gamble, everybody was paid last week. Some were delighted,  somebody rang me up and said, 
\par \'93we can\rquote t have gained that much\'94 (inaudible 703) you know and three or four people owed us money and we\rquote d got the barley so we\rquote ve cleared their accounts. And one chap rang up yesterday morning said,
\par \'94 I\rquote ve got a cheque this morning\'94 , I said Oh yes Mr T, and er, 
\par \'93does that mean I owe you nothing now?\'94, he says , oh just a minute I think that\rquote s the case, just a minute, says yeah, yeah, you owe us nothing clean bill of health and you\rquote ve got a cheque for six or seven hundred pounds, 
\par \'93oh that\rquote s grand\'94 he says, \'93thanks very much\'94 (laughs).. He\rquote s the only one that\rquote s every thanked, he\rquote s obviously delighted that he\rquote s, he probably hadn\rquote 
t worked it out, you know he got forty eight pound a tonne for\'85 Anyway we got him out, him out of trouble, but I suppose, that was, that was our biggest, biggest problem with, with foot and mouth really was the barley job.  And I don\rquote 
t know what would\rquote ve happened if we hadn\rquote t have taken it, I mean, I don\rquote t know how they\rquote d have, I don\rquote t know whether they\rquote d stopped to think about it, you know, what would you, what would you have done, if we hadn
\rquote t taken it?
\par 
\par (tape stop and start)
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 And your wormers, and that sort of thing
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 Yeah, yeah injection, expensive I mean, you\rquote ve Ivomectin}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813  sheep and cattle worm drench}}}{\insrsid5511813  a hundred and sixty pound for 50 ml and 500 mls out of date, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 It\rquote s out of date now as well
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 We\rquote d sell it, sell it off, lamb milk we had to, fortunately we bought it from FCM They took it back, but we\rquote ve had to take it back again, we couldn\rquote t lose our credit we had to take it back in kind, 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid5511813 That\rquote s expensive isn\rquote t it (lamb milk)?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid5511813 
Yeah,  a thousand pound a tonne, yeah we had probably ten or twelve tonne of calf milk replacer, which had a date life of three months on, but fortunately  Settle Wool Growers are part of United Farmers for federal, we found out that they sold Volac}{
\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{
\insrsid5511813  brand of milk replacer powder}}}{\insrsid5511813  so we sent a wagon down, and we did a swap with them but, you know, the cost of getting it there was lost and we had to give them an incentive for taking it, er . Fortunately we\rquote 
ve been members of United Farmers, I mean, they were very good, we just sent word round, long list round, I mean Les Frear down at Furness, South Cumberland he actually bought it off us, Tarf valley were not quite as well off as us they said 
\par \'93We\rquote ll swap you for you, we\rquote ll take that and when you\rquote re ready for stocking again we\rquote ll give you some shorter life stuff\'94. We\rquote d a pallet of erm, calcium borogluconate}{\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid5511813 \chftn }{\insrsid5511813 
 calcium/glucose supplement used in large injections for ewes with lambing sickness (calcium deficiency).}}}{\insrsid5511813  in from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Ireland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, it\rquote d just come about three days beforehand and, we\rquote d bought a pallet because it was cheap. (laughs) Yeah, I mean, its forced us into a decision with our frozen foods and that now, we\rquote 
re just going to pack it in. You know, we lost so much money  with selling all the out of date stuff, I mean I don\rquote 
t know how these big supermarkets do with all the stuff that they, I mean they must lose a fortune, when it goes out of date...............
\par 
\par interview ends}{\b\insrsid5511813 
\par }}