{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1204650\rsid5117407\rsid6387877\rsid6955594\rsid7933361\rsid8338813\rsid9514525\rsid10972131\rsid12779794\rsid16474310}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr13\min3}{\version9}{\edmins9}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords7311}{\nofchars41678}{\nofcharsws48892}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot7933361 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid8338813 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid7933361 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\fs20\insrsid8338813 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM53}{\insrsid8338813 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\insrsid8338813 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid12779794 25}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs17\insrsid8338813 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid8338813 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 1}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 21}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}21/01/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid8338813 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Date of birth: 1952
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8338813 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Occupation: Group 1}{\cs20\super\insrsid8338813 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid8338813 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid8338813  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8338813 
\par }}}{\insrsid8338813 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8338813 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Anyway it was Christm
as you see and this neighbour he come in and we have a drink and that.  Anyway it is Saturday night, he still lives with his mother, and his mother phoned up.  She said could you go to the road end to meet our T, Jesus, right oh then.  So I went down 
and I was pretty annoyed about it.  We are not on a A and everything and basically we are as back to as normal as we are ever going to be.  He said I don\rquote 
t feel I can come down here we have gone so far down this road I think we had better just keep going a
 little bit further and I will just keep away for a bit longer.  This is Christmas.  Saying that after that I was a bit tense about that.  By the time it got to New Year and then New Years day.  I didn\rquote 
t go out New Years eve we just had family and friends around here and just stayed in with the kids and New Years day I set my stall out to go to the village at 5 or 6 o\rquote 
clock and that was my New Years Night out, it replaces me Christmas night out and I quite enjoyed that night.  I think again I had sort of got used to mixing with people over Christmas and I had started relaxing more and\'85. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Had a couple of pints\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Oh, yes and then last, I have had a few nights out lately and as I say I felt it has got better.  Last Saturday night I went out to the village with }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 and I just said there are some neighbours that still find it hard work to speak to us because we went down with foot and mouth and they didn\rquote 
t.   I just feel as if they want to keep their distance a bit and others are quite different, they would glad to see us but the don\rquote t see us at all and you wouldn\rquote t know which ones they are until you actually meet t
hem you know you feel some are very reserved and don\rquote t want to talk.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Not like you were before?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 No, now it also interesting }{\insrsid16474310 [wife?]}{
\insrsid8338813  works for Newton Rigg and they have set her off organising some computer courses, they are just dedicated to farmers, and I 
think most of them she has done through the auction.  She gave the auction as a base.  But she said she would also try and set them up at Gosforth which is quite a distance between auctions and she said to me the other night can you write a list of farmer
s out that are within a 10 mile radius of Gosforth.  Well I did a list it wouldn\rquote t be to all of them because I maybe didn\rquote t go quite to10 miles but I finished up at 80.  Oh she said we can\rquote 
t do that many we can only do 20 odd on a course.  So she set of and
 she phoned the 20 odd, well not 20 odd because some farmers are putting two or three on a course, but she phoned just round the farms that were very close the ??  to and I think she has had a 99% take up of it.  But they offering \'a3
8 an hour not much of an enticement. 
\par 
\par I didn\rquote t feel that she was maybe she was the right person to do it with us going down with foot and mouth and most our neighbours haven\rquote t gone down but they say they are not bothered about that now.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Going back to when foot and mouth started how do you think it has affected your health?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 I maybe put a bit of weight on but I was maybe going to do that anyway.
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 
\par What about all the stress you have been under?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Aye, well I am on blood pressure pills.  I sent down to the doctors two three years ago
 and he said aye you have got blood pressure and put me on these pills and then last spring when foot and mouth set off and actually when I was hearing about it in Essex and where-have-you.  
\par 
\par We have two farms, I have this farm and I have another farm at 
Wydale which is all arable.  There is no buildings there and I was putting some crop in up there and I was thinking how am I going to get this crop put in before it comes round here and you know because I could see that we were going to be restricted in o
u
r movements and that was my main aim to start with and I did get it in it was decent weather and I got quite well  ??and then it got into March and I had a couple of quite good friends went down with foot and mouth in North Cumbria and it got to us that I
 
mean I remember one day I was sitting in the tractor doing someat and I heard it on the local radio Cumbria  that  Ian had  gone down and I was damn near crying and this is a chap that was 35  mile away I thought this is getting near to home now and I act
ually phoned my mother up because my mother lives about three miles from them and she is on the parish council and all that I said I hear Ian has gone down with foot and mouth and she said aye   
\par 
\par Then I kept close watch on the comp
uter.   I had never been on the internet or anything else much at all.   I was pretty green on that thing but once you have to you start getting to love it, working out how to work it.  And all through March I was coming in every night, I was having my su
pper and I was sitting down and switching that thing on.  I knew half the people that have gone down in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
.  I used to work near Wigton, when I was in my twenties, on a farm so I got to know people well round that area.  I still kept contact with a lot of them.  
\par 
\par Going back to actually in February }{\insrsid1204650 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  doing her job with {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 ??  she was down in Devon putting auction drovers through a NVQ and there was one day that week she had been working in an auction that no one had ever heard of befor
e, but we all have now - Halliway but anyway everything got closed down pretty sharpish on the Friday the 23}{\super\insrsid8338813 rd}{\insrsid8338813 
 everything got closed down pretty sharpish and she got back home that night and she said I stopped on the motorway  and put the car through the car wash just to made sure I didn\rquote t bring anything back up with us.  There was a dance at 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Sadden{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bridge{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 that night that we went to,  I forget what it was in aid of but it was local show company or something and everyone was very tight about it, everyone was
 worried, and that was really the last time that farmers got together.  A load of them were there   that night.  And then on the 10}{\super\insrsid8338813 th}{\insrsid8338813  March
, the lad that works for us, was clipping some little feeding sheep out on the polytunnel.  }{\insrsid5117407 [wife]}{\insrsid8338813  was at home 
because I rather think Newton Rigg had gone down with foot and mouth then so she was basically working from home.  She went out to have a look and help him like and there was one she spotted a bit of red on the side of its mouth.  She looked at it and I w
as lading muck in the yard and she shouted at me to come.  When we looked inside its mouth it had an ulcer on the inside of its lip aaah blooming hell and then anyway we just put a mark on it.   }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 come in and phoned our own vet up and he said right shut the gate.   I can\rquote 
t come I will send the Ministry vet out.  So we just battened down the hatches that night.  The Ministry vet came the next day and we went in and went through a bit of paperwork and then he went out in the shed and looked at that one and he wasn\rquote 
t too concerned about it because to be honest the ulcer had maybe dried up a little but there was another sheep fell over as we were catching him.  I mean alright when catching a sheep among 150 one can fall over.  He said to me just grab that an
d hold it and I will have a look at this and he was more concerned for that one but we couldn\rquote 
t see anything else.  Anyway we had a look through all the cattle and went up to look round all the sheep outside and he was happy with everything else.  Then he 
came back in and phoned Page Street and said I will just take a blood sample of those two and just basically clamp everything down, put it on A, we need a sample.  So that was it and we were stuck.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 How did you feel at that point?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Well, that was on the Sa
turday and I think about the Monday, I mean I was worried.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 You must have been very stressed\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 We hadn\rquote t really got used with the fact that foot and mouth was about then  and it wasn\rquote t a bad week actually and we were cutting some firewood and stacking it a
cross there because basically it was the only thing we could do.  We couldn\rquote t go off the farm to do anything and anyways we did that and then we had a craic with our neighbours.  Well she is actually our accountant\rquote 
s wife.  I was talking to her over the phone, how\rquote s your blood pressure, I said it isn\rquote t doing it any good at all, she said get on the phone to the doctor, and tell him.  And anyway I did I phoned }{\insrsid6387877 [doctor]}{\insrsid8338813 
 up he said I will send you some foot and mouth pills.  So I said well I can\rquote t come out \endash  he said well I will get them to you so actually this accountant\rquote 
s wife went down for them and left them at the road end and I collected them from there.  They certainly did help I think they were just a little bit more pills than what I was on.  
So I refer to them as my foot and mouth pills for the rest of the spring.  
\par 
\par Anyway on the following Saturday we got news to say it wasn\rquote t foot and mouth and the restrictions were lifted and we went up to the pub that night for a shandy and my god there we
re a lot of people in that pub that were pleased to see us out I tell you.  And anyway that was that lot.
\par 
\par And then }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  was basically just working from home because Newton Rigg had gone down with foot and mouth and she was just doing bits for Newton Rigg and me and helping us on the farm and one thing and another.  

\par 
\par And then it got into lambing time and we got through lambing time quite nicely really.  It was a bit of an advantage actually }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  being at home because she was here to help us, where are we at now.  
\par 
\par We had a load of fodder in the fodder bay and we were messing about just carting them hand to mouth bringing them as we wanted them and feeding them to the sheep.  I think we got the last load off on the Thursday before Easter and I started p
loughing the fields then.  On the Good Friday I got the other lad who works for us to go with us.  We went round all the fields at Senna and we picked up a few stones up everywhere and I finished up ploughing the trail and then I brought the plough home o
n the Good Friday night.  And I meant to go back on the Saturday to start cultivating the spring barley then it was finished with but I didn\rquote 
t and then I was messing about here with sheep all afternoon.  Then on Easter Saturday I had a neighbour from Whitehaven phoned up to say that }{\insrsid9514525 RK}{\insrsid8338813 
 had gone down with foot and mouth which is another neighbours up there.     Although we didn\rquote t have any livestock up there we had been going  carting these fodder bays back home.  Anyway I phoned down the road and 
he said yes right we have got it.  So we just kept ourselves here and though well if we have brought it we have brought it.  There is nothing we can do but we certainly won\rquote t go near again until it is all over.  Anywhere the lad that phoned us up 
which is the next door neighbour of the farm.  On Sunday night he phoned up and said they were coming to inspect him on the Monday and probably to cull him, he didn\rquote 
t know at that time.  Anyway then they got the stock gathered to value they found it so they to
ok him out.  The next neighbour along they phoned him up - they went in there on the Tuesday morning to cull him and they found it.  So there was three neighbours in a row there all had it.  Another chap who had some sheep up there they actually found it 
i
n his sheep as well.  They foot mouth and all these neighbours had gone.  Anyway we had plenty to do here because we were busy lambing and we found out all these neighbour had gone and as I say we had plenty to do lambing anyway so we just kept going and,
 quite lot a lot of phone contact with them up there.
\par 
\par Also when all these people that had gone down up there another farm up there had some sheep on the farm.  50 odd, it was a separate flock it used to belong to St Bees school and we had bought them off t
he school.  We had always farmed them separately because they were Hebrideans a rare breed.  I had thought a few weeks previously if we went down here with foot and mouth them sheep were away from everybody.  We could always bring them in and just have th
em as a different rare breed.  But anyway them farms had all gone down, I didn\rquote 
t want to go near those sheep and they were starting to lamb I had heard over the phone.  I literally had to ring the Ministry up a couple of times and say take them and they pho
ned back and they said why do you think we should take them and I said they are just a hundred yards off sheep that have gone down.  Anyway they did agree that they should go and they took them.  
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 They culled them?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 They culled them.  Then I had another n
eighbour, up there, well they are not neighbours they are nearly 2 miles away and I have always kept quite good phone contact right foot and mouth, well I always do any time keep contact with them.  }{\insrsid9514525 [neighbour?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 phoned us up on the following Saturday to say that they had gone down with foot mouth and that was that.  Then as I say we just kept going.  Then on the Sunday night I went to bed quite early.  Well I say quite early nearly {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 9}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 30}}}half past nine{\*\xmlclose} and }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 went out to look at the yarls for the last time - true.  We had got all the yawls left I think there was 50 odd left to lamb.  We had them all in one polytunnel.  She went out to check them and I had gone to bed.  
\par 
\par I had a bull out, well it wasn\rquote t on hire, I lent this family the bull last back end.  I said if you winter him I don\rquote 
t want him if you can use him keep him for the winter.  Anyway they phoned up to say that the Ministry vet had been there and spotted a suspect calf and he was going to b
e culled.  He was a bit upset that he had to ring up to tell us that the bull had to go.  If it had to go it had to go.  So on the Monday morning I didn\rquote t go near.  I discussed over the phone with the valuer - she was there at the farm \endash 
 what the value of the bull should be and we agreed a figure. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 Did you get a fair price?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 It was alright.  He was an old bull, he was 8 year old.  I hadn\rquote t had any experience of valuation of foot and mouth stock and I was happy with what we got.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 What about your Hebredian sheep?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
Well there again I was happy with what they got because we would never have got that sort of money for them at the local auction.  Valuation which is quite nice really because the lad who actually did the local valuation was one of the lads who went
 to St Bees school and helped to found the flock so it was quite nice really that that happened.  
\par 
\par Anyway this bull went down.  It was an old bull, one that we had finished using here.  There were quite a lot of his own progeny here so we weren\rquote t using hi
m a lot.  He had a half brother this bull which had made quite a bit of money a few years previous so I had a bit of ammunition there to use.  As I say, I was happy with what I got.  
\par 
\par That was the Monday, and then they phoned back at lunchtime could we take the CID up.  We said we don\rquote 
t want to come to the farm.  They said no fair enough we will get one of the army lads to meet you at the road end.  So I said well I am not going.  }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 said she would take her car and go to their road end then she would wash the car when she came back.  So she did that.  
\par 
\par Then on the Tuesday morning we 30 sheep in the field here with their lambs.  They had never been tailed or anything, they were all about a week old.  We just left them there to harden up a bit and then w
e said we would just have them in and tail them.  So me and }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 went out there and we walked about half way and got the correct lambs with the correct yows (ewes) and brought them into the yard and just as we were going up to the sheep pen }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  said t
here is one there lame.  I turned round and come back into the little shed were I keep me drugs.  There was a box that I keep all our rot gear.  Then when I got back in the pen with the foot rot gear she said here look at this.  She tipped the sheep over 
a
nd it had little white spots in between its feet.  So I had a look in its mouth, she opened its mouth and its top pad had a white film on it.  So I said it looks like foot and mouth to me.  If it anything it is going to be foot and mouth.  I had never see
n it before.  It certainly didn\rquote t look what we had been told it was going to look like.  We expected tongues blistering and you know \'85
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813  It is quite hard to diagnose sometimes.
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
\par So anyway we put it in  the little side pen.  I said  a bit.  We tipped it up and its foot was red, not red, but red raw but there was no white spots on  it.  We looked in its mouth and it had little white pad on its tongue so we put that in a side pen.  
}{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  come in and phoned the vet they said ring this number at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}.  So she phoned them.  I went round and told }{\insrsid9514525 [worker?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 the craic.  So that was {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 11}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}11 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}.  At {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}2 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}
 the ministry vet landed.  He was a decent chap, a grand chap, and a field officer.  There was actually 2 field officers came.  So we looked at these two sheep and they didn\rquote 
t say a lot like.  And they looked and found another that felt warm and I think they found another where its pad was white and one of these they actually found in the morning they had rubbed it, its skin came off this white pad in its mouth.  So
 we walked through the cattle and we couldn\rquote 
t see anything wrong with the cattle.  So he told us very nicely as we were standing with the cattle in the field say you have got it and so anyway they were pedigree cattle all our cattle were pedigree.  So we got DT who was also a {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname State}}limousin{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} breeder who sells quite a lot of stock and we felt that we couldn\rquote t go to any other auction company apart from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}
Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} and asked for D himself to come and value the stock.  I think he probably valued them quite well.  We
 were maybe nicely surprised with the money we got for the cattle. The sheep - I had heard all sort of prices on the sheep.  I mean I had heard of a farmer who the price for stock and this chap got about 20 pound a head less than that value than this othe
r farmers stock so I was happy with that.  If I was nearly crying that day when D the valuer come }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 met him at the gate but anyway everybody said that I took him through the stock well because I sort of showed him individually all the cattle and that w
as in an old book which I did a years before for a herd judging competition and I had all the animal details in it so while I was waiting of him to come I updated it a little bit with a few details and I had it all in a book details of them so that all we
nt well and the sheep and the value of the sheep
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 That must have\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Well they were all alive and healthy then sheep pens.  I mean the only sheep that were sick were these that were them that were in the sheep pens, there were so few. I mean there were 1500 and odd sheep they were healthy.  No it isn
\rquote t too bad really that.  I mean actually we only had 44 left to lamb and the sheep were well they did look well all round and it was a good afternoon good dry afternoon the sheep were dry Anyway we got that job done.  
\par 
\par We farmed the children out at night. I have two daughters and a son.  The eldest daughter boarded at school, the youngest daughter went to a friend for the night and our son went }{\insrsid9514525 [away]}{\insrsid8338813  for a weekend.   
\par 
\par So the two Ministry lads actually stayed the night that night.  They even helped us to feed the pet lambs at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 10}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}
{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}10 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} at night.  And they sat and  discussed everything and they actually slept in the girls\rquote  bedrooms.  At {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 6}}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}six o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} the next morning they went out and helped us gather all th
e stock up.  It was quite interesting and half the field of sheep left in front of the house were just left there, and the ones in the sheep pens were just left there and I put a bit of hay out for those in the sheep pens at bedtime and although there mou
ths were red raw and everything else they all come and had a bite of hay.  But the next morning we went at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 6}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}
{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}6 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} and gathered all the other sheep up into the field up at Garr so they could slaughter them in that field and I come back down and we went ou
t for the other half of this field of sheep.  But by then it had gone through that field of sheep -every one was lame.  We put them in the sheep pens and just left them a lot of paperwork to do and organise over the phone.  The telephone never stopped rin
ging saying have you got it.  Aye anyway he sort of handled all that.  I remember about lunchtime the slaughter men had had slaughtered all the stock up there and now were squaring up down here, there was a few to tidy up down here.  I wasn\rquote 
t involved when 
they killed the big batch of sheep up at Garrs it was and they just into a field and left them.  Just about lunch time they got us to go out and sort, well I said I would I sort out all the over 5 year olds out and put them in a separate pen because they 
had to go to Widness to be rendered they couldn\rquote 
t be buried due to BSE.  I knew all the under 5s so I went out and sorted them out and put them out in the yard ready for it, the slaughtermen were there.  They were quite good were the slaughtermen, they said they wouldn\rquote 
t put them down the crush to slaughter them they would just shoot them with rifles in the yard because they were likely to feel a bit excited.  So I left them with that and went down the field, the last field of sheep down into east field sort
ed them out. I come back into the yard, did a few jobs and by then they had started shooting.  And if you think it doesn\rquote t bother you it doesn\rquote 
t half make you cringe when the guns start going off.  And just after they had shot about 3.  I think the oldest 
cow on the farm I seen him drop.  It made me twinge a bit and there was an epidemiologist chap here and he asked do you mind having a chat with him. Aye. We will go in the kitchen if you want.  So he come in here with us and we were sitting in here having
 
a cup of coffee and discussing where the disease was coming to and going from and everything else and all my neighbours farms, you know.  And by the time he had got finished the guns had stopped.  I said did those buggers send you in here purposely to get
 
me and Ian out of the way.  No he says it is just the way it happens.  I am nearly sure he did.  Anyway I was sitting here and there were a few and stock messing about out there.  He said if you want to sit at the other end of the table.  I said no once t
h
ey are dead they are dead.  I went out after they were still shooting sheep.  They had finished all the cattle flying everywhere.  I went down and there was a heap of dead calves just as we trying to get out I pointed that out to them and they sorted them
 out.  Anyways I wasn\rquote 
t out there all that much really.  I send my lad the last pen of sheep and I just left it with them. Actually went out while we were in here with the epidemiologist with the camera and took photographs as everything happened.  Which wa
s quite interesting really if you look at it now and look back everything in the pens ready to be slaughtered we   
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 How many have you got them?
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
\par We have got them.  They were here at one time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Don\rquote t worry. ..  }{\insrsid8338813 (interviewee is heard searching for photos, can\rquote t find them)
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 I will show you them some days.  So and then about 5 or {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 6}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}6 o\rquote clock
{\*\xmlclose} in afternoon I say they were loading sheep.  Most of the cattle had been loaded.  So there was the Ministry vet, the main field officer, myself and }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 had a cup of tea and went sat out there having a cup of tea a nice sunny day and by then it was pissing down nicely by then.  
\par 
\par There was a little field up the hill on the other side of the lane and I just said to the Ministry ve
t did anybody get those sheep in the little field on the other side of the lane.  He looked at me over his glasses and said you told me about them last night didn\rquote t you?  He said all the slaughter teams have gone now haven\rquote 
t they?  I had another sip of my tea and I said well I have got a 22.  He said would you mind,  last load of sheep.  I said go on then let\rquote 
s get it done.  So he washed me off pressure washed the land rover, loaded the hurdles in the landrover, pressure washed me off, put the gun in the la
nd rover and detox team followed, the skip wagon followed that and off we went for these 12 sheep.  We got there and we were unloading, gathering them up rather into a pen, when a chap popped his head through the hedge. I said who are you.  He said I am t
he Ministry of Agriculture, health and Safety.  So me and the vet just sort of looked at one another.  Then we carried on across the fields and I said what are we going to do now.  He says I don\rquote t know we\rquote 
ll just carry on I might have enough left of lethal 
injection to inject them, I am not sure I have enough or not.  Anyway we put them in the pen.  He started doing the lambs.  The Detox team were out on the road and said eeh hello here is so so coming, which was the slaughter team coming down the road.  So
 by then they were aware of what the craic was so they stopped them. They came in and slaughtered them so we didn\rquote t have \'85 I actually had the gun out of the landrover but I didn\rquote t dare \'85
  in case this health and safety chap had seen us.  So we just sneaked that back into the landrover.  I don\rquote t know what he would have said anything the land rover.  I don\rquote 
t know whether the foot and mouth rules allow that or not.  I think anything basically goes to get them shot really doesn\rquote t it when it comes to foot and mouth.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 How did you feel that night after it finished?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Well, dark and I couldn\rquote t sleep.  Bloody awful day. It was quiet... Anyway we did nothing really that Thursday morning, not a lot..  Then I could hear a load of vehicles moving on the hill and down getti
ng culled sheep from round about us.  Then at lunchtime the Ministry vet appeared.  He said could he disinfect off himself well get round our fields and a few other field that he had told us about and check there wasn\rquote 
t any sheep left because he had a report that there were odd sheep kicking about on the fields.  I went around and I think I found two.   slaughtered the last two.  
\par 
\par I don\rquote t know what }{\insrsid9514525 [worker]}{\insrsid8338813  did on that Thursday.  What did }{\insrsid9514525 [he]}{\insrsid8338813  do on the Thursday, not a lot did we, the day after the cattle we
nt.  We had a quiet day on the Thursday.  Then on the Friday morning - well going back to the Thursday night the Ministry then said they wanted, there is a large forest up pas us, and they wanted to check that to make sure there was no stray sheep in ther
e.  So on the Friday - by then we had heard we were going to have build a lagoon over the back field and put the dirty water and put all the muck.  So }{\insrsid9514525 [worker]}{\insrsid8338813  started to move some machinery about because he didn
\rquote t have to go on the road or anything to do.  Mo
ved the machinery back in the back field.  The detox team were here doing a preliminary disinfection.  The Ministry vet asked if I found in the forest basically to identify any sheep they.  So the lad who was a sharp shot rifle for the Ministry vet, field
 officer, and off we went I think we got 8 or 9.  I don\rquote t think yes sheep waste of time.  Then also that day field full of and nothing happening and I though there is time yet.  This was the 26}{\super\insrsid8338813 th}{\insrsid8338813 
 April time to get some crop in.  So I said to the field officer is there any chance of getting a detox team to disinfect that tractor and we can use it on the road.  So he said yes aye.  So }{\insrsid9514525 [worker]}{\insrsid8338813 
 took the plough in by this time the detox team  and then it was ready and then on the Saturday the tractors field  and st
arted ploughing which was much to a lot of peoples disgust because everybody thought how the hell has he got that tractor into that field, I did it like through.     
\par 
\par Anyway life went on.  The first week after that we maybe concentrated, not too much on tidying up round here put actually getting this other crop in. It was very difficult and I then found out that I couldn\rquote 
t get a contactor on the farm to sow the crops.  We just had to do it with our own machinery and that but we managed.  And then anyway there was all sort of rumours, craics and everything get started and spread about.  
\par 
\par So by the time it got a week into May trading standards were on the phone they wanted to meet us.  There had been allegation that I had been doing all sorts of things.  Aye
 right.  So where could they meet us at.  They suggested E police station.  By then, by the craics and rumours, I had been locked up and jailed and I don\rquote 
t know what for everything I had done wrong, rumours and craic.  So like a fool me I said I would meet them at E police station.  Aye it is an independent place and they could also do a recorded interview there you see.  So }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{
\insrsid8338813  came with us so we went to E police station.  Well everybody\rquote s grannies and mothers and everybody must have seen us go into the police station and come back out because everybody knew.
\par 
\par There was three things trading standards had had reported to them.  A, I had been ploughing these field on the top of the hill and how on earth had I got the machinery there.  It was easy I got the
 ministry to detox it and move the tackle up it.  I have actually got a way through the wood and we did bring some machinery back and forward through it, it was dry weather.  They weren\rquote 
t too happy about us going through the little stream across there because the stream obviously goes down through the fields but where do you stop at with bio security.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 You had OK\rquote d all that with the Ministry?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Well yes, the Ministry didn\rquote t say we could, they didn\rquote t say we couldn\rquote t, but said well how big is a string.  We didn\rquote 
t really get an answer off them so we just kept going as it happens there was no really any foot and mouth more in the area then.  So there must have been bio security good enough.  So that was question one - how had we got this machinery up there to do 
the work.  Question 2 was we had been reported moving silage along the roads back from Senna to Gosforth.  I said I don\rquote t know why because I haven\rquote t got any silage to move and I haven\rquote 
t got any stock to move it to, so that got rid of that idea.  So they were happy with that.  Item 3, I had been sighted moving livestock in the middle of the night.  I said I haven\rquote 
t got any livestock left.  So they were happy with all that.  I say it is just how rumours and that start.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 It must make you feel quite bitter all these allegations against you after... }{\insrsid8338813 (interruption here)
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Aye it did.
\par 
\par Now when you look back, we didn\rquote t have a field officer for the first  [? Part of the week] so we weren\rquote 
t getting any feedback off the Ministry.  As we got a field officer and we were starting to get a bit of feed back off the Ministry we found out that they were probably coming from maybe two neighbours that were shit scared and didn\rquote 
t understand the set up anyway here.  The slightest thing that happened they were ringing up the Ministry.  They were reporting anybody for anything.  I am not sure that the neighbours have got over it yet.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 So are things sorted out now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Yes, so we finally got a field officer
 because we decided we would do our own C&D (cleaning and disinfectant)  work.  We got two field officer, two good lads. I know he had his work to do but you could certainly work with him.  One thing about this foot and mouth lark you meet a lot of people
, you certainly have met a good cross section I can tell you some are grand lads and some of them are right bloody plonkers I can tell you.  I am not telling you what category I am putting you in.
\par 
\par  }{\b\insrsid8338813 It is not a bad scheme is it? }{\insrsid8338813 [phone rings \endash  tape switched off]}{\b\insrsid8338813  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
It is not a bad scheme it is a better scheme than countryside stewardship scheme.  I mean this land at Whitehaven I have got that countryside stewardship scheme in year 5 now. This will be the last year when we will be doing a lot of hedging and th
at.  But there isn\rquote t a lot of either payment or restriction on the middle of the field.  I feel they could maybe have put some restriction on and some payments on the middle of the field more than just \'85
 I mean I have got two metre margins around all the fields and they pay quite nicely on that
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Is that the Stewardship?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 The middle of the field\'85. I have started leaving an odd field here and there as winter stubble just for the birds and it is also working well in with my own farming system
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i\insrsid8338813 Side 2 of tape
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
\par Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 We\rquote ll see.
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
\par Time will tell.  It is beyond that.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Aye it is.  So going back when your stock was culled, do you ever get flashbacks to that day?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 That first week or so when I was sitting ploughing, and doing jobs sitting on the tractor, just sitting th
ere thinking about it all there were many a time I had to wipe tears off my eyes, I can tell you.  The more you talk about it, the less it hurts.  That is what I feel is happening.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Has that been quite a helpful thing to do talking to different people about it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Well, you certainly find out who your friends and neighbours are.  Some neighbours who you maybe haven\rquote t had a lot of contact with over the years are very good and ringing you up at the tim
e every other day to see if you are alright and probably all through summer as well maybe once every two or three weeks just for the craic and to see how you are and it is nice when you think back to think that they did it.  There is others who you tried 
t
o maybe befriend over the years just a waste of time.  I mean obviously down here there was only two farms in this parish were they found foot and mouth and if you go on this land that I have got at Senna all the neighbours there got it and there is a dif
ferent attitude altogether because they were all in the same boat.  So everybody feels a lot easier about it.  
\par 
\par Around here it was just a bit tense and still is.  I mean we had one neighbour I never had any track with him actually I owe him \'a3120 because th
ere was one of his sheep in our valuation. I got his value accepted for him but he has never been down and I have never been up so I have never paid him.  He won\rquote 
t need it.  And he is a National Trust tenant and he appealed because they were going to go an
d cull him because he was a neighbour of ours.  He appealed against it.  He is a lad 52 or 3.  He farms on his own, he is not married.  Probably the best thing he could have done financially was to take the money and walk away and leave the National Trust
 with the responsibility to pick up the bits.  But he didn\rquote 
t he stuck to his guns out and he appealed and the herdwick sheep society backed him and the National Trust backed up he kept them out but I think by the time he got through all that he was probably
 wishing to hell that he had left it.  I think they put him on an A and he was never allowed on or off the premises because of the restrictions.  I don\rquote t think he actually saw a human being for I don\rquote 
t know how many weeks.  I think he did actually let the Ministry on to walk through his stock eventually. I mean them people probably suffered more than we suffered maybe but there again they still have got their stock we haven\rquote t.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Have you got round to thinking about restocking yet?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 We are restocking.  We had all pedigree {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname State}}limousins{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I mean I had sort of though when foot and mouth was all about well if they are going to come and cull our sheep to save our cattle, will so be it.  I didn\rquote t want the cattle to go.  It has took us all that time to get them bred up f
or them to go like that but anyway if it happens then it happens.    
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 When did you restock?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 26 October [2001] the first animals come.  Anyway as time went on we got through harvest and everything else with all the bloody licence and restriction and everything else but we managed to get there and I think 3}{
\super\insrsid8338813 rd}{\insrsid8338813  September we were actually inspected clean subject to a lagoon getting sorted.  The lagoon was sorted and then - was it 27}{\super\insrsid8338813 th}{\insrsid8338813 
 September - was our date when we were actually passed clean and then we had 21 days.  
\par 
\par So early October, }{\insrsid9514525 [neighbour?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 started looking at stock.  We had one neighbour who said she had a few beef cattle and could we buy them and then she would be whole dairy.  So we thought well it is sentinel livestock it might be alright.  
\par 
\par Then I have an uncle who over the years he had just got shot at with cancer and I thought well I am going to have to go up and help to look after his stock I might as well buy them.  So I suggested that I bought the stock of him and he agreed.  
\par 
\par And sheepwise I had a
nother neighbour who passed a few hints through summer that he had all these new shearings to sell in the autumn and that I should probably buy them to restock with.  Anyway I phoned up one day, one Friday morning, and just by chance that day he had put a
n
 advert in the Cumberland News advertising these sheep.  So I had quite a long craic with him and thought well we would be interested in these sheep and then he suggested that another neighbour might be interested in them or in taking some of them.  I sai
d no, if we were going to buy them we would buy the lot we didn\rquote t want anybody else in with ??    So later on that day he phoned up and said if you want to see them you have got to come now because I have got someone else coming.  So I wasn\rquote 
t at home actually.  }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 was at home she had an operation in hospital in September and she was off for a few weeks.  So she went down and had a look at them and did a deal with him.  They wanted 76 probably twice the money as what we were thinking he should get but far
 less than what we had initially. Buick? sheep we always had chippers? before so we were going for better sheep.  So I though right we will have them - so that was then.  
\par 
\par And then cattle, we had two these small batches of cows and then we wanted some tip
s for the sheep and so I though about another neighbour who had a few texel sheep.  So I phoned him up went down to look at these texel tup lambs that he had.  Well, I finished up I bought his 3 texel tup lambs all his texel young shearlings and a few lam
b
s so that was 27 more female sheep and these 4 tups.  But he also had two heifers with calves which he wanted to sell while I was there.  So I bought them and then I come back I though we are doing well now.  Then I said D S has been on he wants to sell h
is tupper cows and I begin to think hang on how many cattle can I handle.  Anyway I thought I will go and look at them and he invited B F to try to sell them as well. Then when I went to look at them he wasn\rquote 
t talking silly money.  The biggest thing was tha
t he needed to sell the cattle.. I liked the calves, the cows looked a very mixed up batch but the calves were quite young and all by the same bull and very uniform.  And then we though well we are not going to go back into pedigree right away because the
re isn\rquote 
t going to be the selection of stock round here.  Well anybody is going t want sell them had all gone down with foot and mouth so maybe better just go for  commercial now and maybe  look someday to  buy an odd pedigree cow and start back in pedigree 
market I saying that I don\rquote t know we really do want to now are in commercials.     
\par 
\par Incidentally my uncle, who I bought these cows off, he had a little Belgium blue cross-bred Limousin bull which he bought of us a couple of years ago and it was the only m
ongrel I think I have ever bred.  And it was out of quite a well bred cow of my own, a pedigree limosin, and it got out into a neighbour\rquote 
s field and got bulled by quite a good well priced Belgian Blue bull.  So anyway that is what I have got a cross bred bull.  I felt obliged that I should give him his money back on that.  I finished up with a bull.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 So what was restocking like?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 It was a good job that }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  was off work and she was sitting there because it took more sorting out on the ruddy telephone to g
et a licence.  I mean every time you go past on the tractor and you looked through the window and she is there sitting on that telephone hour by hour just getting the job sorted.  So I was maybe lucky I missed a lot of that.  I was just there for the good
 bits.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 How do you think it has affected your family, the whole foot and mouth thing?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Initially, our son he has diabetes, but also he has epilepsy.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Is he insulin dependent?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 He is insulin dependent, he is on a few drugs for his epilepsy.   He went off to }{\insrsid9514525 [friend}{\insrsid8338813 \rquote s}{\insrsid9514525 ?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 for that first few days when we were down with foot and mouth and then the week after he came back and his epilepsy was giving him some stick and he finished up, he and }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  went into hospital in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Newcastle{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and he was in for about a fortnight. ??had gone down with   foot and mouth so that was a bit of a ... I am sure it was just stress.
\par 
\par The girls, it is difficult to say I mean they have no illnesses through it.  I think actually 
the eldest girl goes to St Bees school and I think quite a quiet girl but she had quite a few peers from up and down the county - maybe a few from the north of the county, farming people, and she has maybe discussed it with them 
and they probably understood it maybe a little bit more of than what she would have done where the other daughter goes to the local comprehensive school and it is people round here that didn\rquote 
t really understand it anyway.  But then again she is a girl who is a bit more outgoing and she was [inaudible] pretend farming didn\rquote t really exist.   I think }{\insrsid9514525 [girl]}{\insrsid8338813 
 was worried but I think maybe she had a few peers at school who helped her through.  Difficult, as I say I am sure that the stress did affect }{\insrsid9514525 [son]}{\insrsid8338813  at that time - foot and mouth.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 What about your wife?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Well as I say she works for N R.  They went down early March so she wasn\rquote t going into work there.  She doesn\rquote t do a lot of work, well she wasn\rquote t doing a lot of work at N R.  She was doing it away from the
 college.  So she had taken to do quite a bit of work over the telephone for them.   She handled it maybe better than me I think - well she certainly did handle it better than me.     
\par 
\par I have been booked in for a varicose vein operation for the last three
 years. I was telling you, and she said right you are going to go. And then I was in for that and then a couple of weeks after that we went to Oasis [leisure centre] for a weekend.  Well I blame my leg for that but I couldn\rquote 
t have enjoyed that weekend, I just couldn\rquote t.  If I had 3 good legs I couldn\rquote t have enjoyed that weekend.  I was that tensed up and the fact that, just the fact that I was going away from here.  I was terrified to think what I don\rquote 
t know whether I was terrified thinking that I was going to take it away from here or I was going to  bring it back from P and bring it from my other neighbours or what I don\rquote t know. [inaudible]
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Do you think it affected your relationship in any way?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 No. I don\rquote t think so.  We were certainly very close for a week or two after it happened, I tell you.  I think she maybe handled it better than me.  She said we are going for a holiday at half term, she hadn\rquote 
t asked before.   She took us to the Isle of White.  They were dying to have a holiday and they dragged us off
 to the Isle of White and it had rained for a fortnight before that and I had a few jobs going.  I do a bit of contacting for other people, combining and that, and there was someone who wanted to ??? but it wasn\rquote 
t quite ready and anyway I finished up I sai
d alright I will go there is nothing taking any harm.  Well the weather come brilliant while I was away and I missed a few good days and I regretted it all harvest.  I was just that 3/4 days behind myself right through.   I wish I had never gone anywhere 
t
hen I got finished. You know with having a bit of arable land and doing a bit of contract work and that but you can only do work when you can, when the weather allows and then there was quite a good weather spell early in November and we got really well c
aught up.  Then mid November come and I said I could go on holiday now and they said we can\rquote 
t go now because everybody is back at school and work and school and everything else.   So anyway she said the other week right half term we are going on holiday we 
are going to fly away somewhere to where it is warm.  So I am just going to have to work round it I think and go.
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Of course they were saying when I went to the Isle of Wight I didn\rquote t enjoy it and I grumped and moaned I was downright bloody miserable and t
he last couple of days I got to enjoying it, I really enjoyed it.  But that is it you just go on holiday for a week it nearly takes that first week to get to enjoying but if you go on holiday for 2 week it is too long isn\rquote 
t it.  You are getting bored.  I remember once we went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Yugoslavia{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 for two weeks.  As it happened the first week was really hot and the second week cooled off a bit.  So it helped because we enjoyed the second week but it could have been, if the first second week had been like it two wee
ks would be too long. But saying that through foot and mouth I think we only had two holidays: we had one in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Yugoslavia{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and one in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}Tenerife{\*\xmlclose}.  }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  and the kids went off a few times just to different places in this country but I didn\rquote t go with them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 Did anything good come out of foot and mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 It sorted the overdraft out.  It did, I mean, I make no bones about it we have restocked but we have also sorted the overdraft out and quite a bit of money that we had borrowed and the problem is resolved.  I just
 hope we never get back in that situation.   I was borrowing too much money in future.  There is nothing against borrowing a little bit, but we just got to where were borrowing too much because we weren\rquote t getting the output: the output wasn\rquote 
t worth anything.  A bit of both I think. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 What do you think was the worst thing about the whole foot and mouth crisis?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 I say I think my memories go back I feel more when I Bl and R P and them went down early on with foot and mouth.  I felt for them more than I felt wh
en we actually went down ourselves.   Because you are in among it and just move from minute to minute when you are actually here happening.  But they were early cases we were case 1459 you know, it is just a number by the time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 A lot of people said that the worse thing was trying to get through to DEFRA.  Trying to sort out all the paperwork\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid8338813 Yes I had bad days on the phone trying to get through to people.  As I say  you do meet some good people and there is all sorts.   I mean,
 there was one come about a week after we went down with foot and mouth they come do this lagoon, Cumbrian Construction landed.  A good foreman, do this, they got started and then they said they might as well leave until the Tuesday, this was on the Frida
y, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}3 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} because they didn\rquote t have any wire netting and they wanted some sand to line the bottom with.  The Monday was a bank holiday so they said we\rquote 
ll just go off and come back on Tuesday because there was no panic now.  Weather was good and we had ple
nty of  facilities in the other tank.  So just as he was saying that there was a car pulled up and I went out and said who are you?  He said Ministry of Agriculture I am a field officer to oversee this job.   I said well they are going now and won\rquote 
t come back till Tuesday, they haven\rquote t got the materials.  So the lads away and then I come away and left the job.  Talk to Neil on the telephone or something and then - I know what happened \endash 
 there was a lorry would come to look round any damage and dead stock been destroyed and that.  So I was round the back at about {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}half past 6{\*\xmlclose}
 at night with this chap and this car was still there and this DEFRA fellow got out and stood up and stretched and I said have you been asleep and he said aye.  So he got in his car and go
t away then.  I thought aright maybe he had nowt else to do for afternoon so.  
\par 
\par Then on the Saturday I was up on the tops drilling barley and }{\insrsid6387877 [wife?]}{\insrsid8338813  was in hospital with }{\insrsid9514525 [son]}{\insrsid8338813  and the girls\'85  When we went down with foot and mouth we put the horses in a f
ield at the bottom.  Then we said we could move them back into a field nearer home if they brought them through fields and through the back yard without going on the road.  So }{\insrsid9514525 [neighbour?]}{\insrsid8338813 
 phoned us up on the mobile and I said did you get the horses moved.  She said no we don\rquote t want to move them because that DEFRA keeps sitting in the back yard.  This was on the Saturday afternoon.  I said what is he doing.   She said I don\rquote 
t know he just sat there from about {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}11 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose} this morning.  So I said well I am coming down shortly.  So I walked down the field because I don\rquote 
t go down the road.  So I walked down the field and I come over to where he was sitting and I said what are you doing.  He said I have come to oversee this job until it is done.  I said I told you y
esterday they are not coming back until Tuesday there is no need to sit here.  Oh he said I was told to do it so I am sitting here.  So I though if he was putting the willies up them girls.  So I come in and I phoned {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}
}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}.  It was a lass that I knew on the phone so I told her the craic.   She said just leave it with us T, I will get him moved and within ten minutes he went down that road and I have never seen him back again. 
\par 
\par The lads come and put the lagoon in with no field officer on the scene.  You do see things like that.  He was just here for the overtime on the weekend.
\par 
\par How much more do you want on that tape?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid8338813 That\rquote s it.  Is there anything important that I haven\rquote t asked you?
\par }{\insrsid8338813 
\par I don\rquote t think so.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8338813 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }}