{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid11809529\rsid13262720\rsid13785086\rsid16606980}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min3}{\printim\yr2002\mo5\dy21\hr18\min11}
{\version3}{\edmins0}{\nofpages20}{\nofwords5068}{\nofchars28894}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws33895}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot16606980 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\fs20\insrsid13262720 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid16606980 Lancaster University
\par }{\fs20\insrsid13262720 Interview ID:  PM24
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs18\insrsid13262720 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid11809529 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs18\insrsid13262720 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid13262720 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 21}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}21/02/02{\*\xmlclose}

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid13262720 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Date of birth: 1959
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13262720 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Occupation: Group 4}{\cs20\super\insrsid13262720 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid13262720 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid13262720  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13262720 
\par }}}{\insrsid13262720 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid13262720 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria21{\*\xmlclose} February 2002
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 I wonder if you can you talk me through some of the events of last year
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 It was quite a strange year.  I had just come back from working in the Scotland/NorthEast region, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Newcastle{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, they had got us over there following the October floods in 2000.  It was only about the end of January/February that I actually returned to the office and it seemed to me as soon as we got there that the foot and mouth outbreak kicked off.  
\par 
\par Initially there wasn\rquote t a great deal of involvement other than plotting where things were developing and, working in the flood defence department, we didn\rquote t get 
that involved but it became apparent that they needed our expertise on information systems and so quite a lot of people in the department were initially involved in using maps and where outbreaks where occurring.  
\par 
\par Then DEFRA came forward and asked for vo
lunteers to go as gatekeepers.  So really without thinking I got involved because I like being outside more than in the office to a general degree I put my name forward.  So we were invited to a briefing which took place here at the agency.  It lasted abo
u
t an hour, then virtually a brief explanation by people from MAFF (at the time) what the job involved which seemed to be just standing at the gate issuing licences and other paperwork.  Then we were whisked off to Rose Hill, given some equipment and told 
to ring the vet the following day and you will be assigned to your first farm. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 When was this, sorry?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 It would be towards the end of February, about the same time now. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So, quite soon after the outbreak occurred?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Yes, it wasn\rquote 
t too long after the outbreak occurred.  So I rang the vet up, he was a very young lad; he wasn\rquote t from this area.  The first job was a farm at Osrigg on the fell side of Cumbria.  It turned out to be somebody\rquote 
s farm I knew.  I spent a lot of time in childhood my in that area.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Did that make it easier or more difficult?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I think it made it easier because I got all over the place.  Initially when I turned up I didn\rquote t know what they were going to do so I stood on the gate and then the vet came down from the fa
rm and said you are not doing anything here I need your help up at the farm and so we just got involved helping the slaughter team and the vet.  Initially I was standing at the gate doing nothing whatsoever.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What did you think about that at the time?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well, we probably did more good helping out.   They didn\rquote t give any concern regarding their own health and safety.  I think the events just took over and you just did what you could to help at the time.
\par 
\par There was no sign of a field officer from MAFF at the time.  I didn\rquote 
t see one for at least a week and half to two weeks after that.  So virtually you were acting as a link between the farmer.  They were desperate for information from MAFF and I spent a lot
 of fruitless time on the phone trying to get information on their behalf.  Managed to push things through by ringing our own incident room, which was then operating down here.  I think one of the initial things we found out is it is very difficult obtain
ing information.  The farmers couldn\rquote t sort of use the representative from the government at the time; myself and the vet were kind of burdened with it all.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 That must have been quite stressful.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes it was frustrating as well because I couldn\rquote t find anythi
ng out from them and then you could see they were getting frustrated they could take it out on me.   I was amazed by how they handled it themselves.  I mean they had the right I could drive away and go home for a short time but they had to live with it.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 How much did your experiences in those first few days match the job description that MAFF give you? 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well it didn\rquote t really match it at all.  We did issue licences to the farmers and their families but, because nothing was decided regarding disposal at that time \endash  I mean the stock was lying about dead for days. 
\par 
\par I had a problem because this farmer had two satellite farms as well which I had also to go and look at.  That meant constantly disinfecting my vehicle, myself and then coming to and fro.  Unfortunat
ely one of the smallholdings was like a barn complex right smack in the middle of Normanton village right amongst some houses and next to the pub and there was slaughtered stock lying about there and nobody seemed to be able to move it. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 It must have been very frustrating.
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Very frustrating, yes, trying to get people to come and look at the problem and get somebody there.  I was actually badgering people here and badgering people up at Rose Hill}{\cs20\super\insrsid13262720 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid13262720 \chftn }{\insrsid13262720  }}}{\insrsid13262720 
 trying to do something about it.     
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So from that first day, how did events unfold?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well, the first week was pretty much the same, quite traumatic, because nothing was happening on my farm I got sent to other farms and we just ended up doing the same thing, helping the slaughter teams.  I mean the difficult t
hing was the real intention was just to stay on that gate but that just wasn\rquote t possible because of the spreading outbreaks developing so that was \'85
 it was a relief to hear that the army was eventually to be called in but we knew that would take some time t
o organise and there seemed to be a gap unfortunately between the farms that the army was assigned to and the ones that MAFF was supposed to be dealing with initially and a number of farms just seemed to be forgotten - regarding disposal.   A lot of time 
I think our field officer told us that we had to get on the phone and try and get things moving.  We were virtually acting as field officers rather than gatekeepers.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Right, it certainly sounds like that.
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Certainly when the army first got involved they were sending a NCO or corporal to the farms.  The first ones I met wouldn\rquote 
t go near the stock at all.  Their orders were not to so they stood on the gates while we helped the slaughter team and the vets. I never want to see it again, but at the time we were j
ust doing what we could to help people.  I never had any animosity from them, from the farming community whatsoever.  They were fantastic to me.   I think it helped maybe being a local lad.  I think most of the farmers, the majority of farmers I went to, 
I actually knew - that certainly helped me.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Do you think it was good for them to see a familiar face?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes, it is difficult to think what to say to them really.  I mean they could have been really nasty \endash  they could sort of see me as sort of being DEFRA or
 the government, an arm of government but for some reason I never faced that at all.  I never encountered any animosity at all, all the time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What about the way the slaughter teams were operating?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Things were pretty good the only problem is that they had so many jobs they were running out of overalls.  I had to be quite strict with them regarding disinfectant.  Certainly it was a worry for me that that weren\rquote 
t taking enough time over disinfecting - 
they were just keen to get onto the next job or they had so many jobs to do a day and they had to forfil the quota.  It certainly concerned me when a slaughter team that worked on an farm went to a disposal site where then went onto another farm, there wa
s
 quite a big risk. I annoyed them quite a bit by making them disinfect all the army vehicles.  Luckily they were local people from the Penrith area so I knew most of them myself.  So they did actually listen to me in the end and then they were quite pleas
ed because I had a number of spare disposable overalls to issue for the next job, because they had run out.  
\par 
\par We were very lucky at the agency, staff  here were very supportive to us outside and kept phoning to see how we were getting on and also they were
 delivering.  They set up a supply system and they delivered supplies of overalls, disinfectant.  At the time even the farmers were borrowing stuff off us because they couldn\rquote t get hold of what they needed.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Why do you think you think the Environment Agency could do that and DEFRA couldn\rquote t?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Well we didn\rquote t have as many personnel \'85  DEFRA had the supply depot at Rose Hill, we actually had staff and vehicles going out delivering this actually to people on \endash  not on site but just off site.  They were dropping o
ff off-site and we were going down and picking it up.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 It sounds like very quickly the Environment Agency set up the logistic or systems to get deliveries going\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 We had sort of experience of doing that in my department.  It was mainly from defence protection, running a network for an emergency workforce.  Because they couldn\rquote 
t do any ongoing flood defence work or maintenance work they were being seconded onto this job and they were also helping with disinfecting.  So we had a support base.  We set up our own incident room even before the army set up theirs at Rose Hill.  

\par 
\par I mean that was a major problem was lack of army staff, there didn\rquote t seem to be any central co-ordination.  We saw people in emergency planning working close to 18 hours.  I was quite taken aback at the lack of forethought or lessons learnt from 
\lquote 67.  I was quite dismayed how slowly the reaction was to get the army in.  The initial reaction when it took of in this county to get the army in as soon as possible. It seemed to take a long time
.  I know there had been logistical problems arranging it all.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Do you think there any resistance to the army becoming involved on the part of DEFRA?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Because I was out there I was really unable to gauge that.  I am sure the brigadier, having met him, wouldn\rquote t have been afraid of stepping on people toes, I am sure he wasn\rquote 
t but I think it needed that.  I think getting all the agencies together in one building and certainly having an operations room was a must.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Did you see Countryfile on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 No, not\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Birtwhistle was being interviewed, apparently he is writing a book.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I am not surprised.  I saw he was on the TV the other night I can\rquote t remember what - with Prince Charles.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So how long where you doing this job?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I would be out on the farm just over a month before I got pulled off. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So about a month?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I finished on a Church of England one, a tenant farmer.  Out towards Carlisle, about two miles outside Carlisle, quite a small farm.  I had a lot of empathy with them, it was a lad working there
 of about of 37 and he had lost his parents, he had lost a dairy herd, it was awful.  He also gone through a similar situation to myself when my marriage broke up.  He had split with his wife but she had come back to help on the farm and got stuck on ther
e with the foot and mouth so they had the additional problem of living in the same house through all that as well.  I used to sit and talk to them and help out as much as I could on the farm, take supplies out.  You did get personally involved you couldn
\rquote t avoid it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Yes, it must have been very difficult not to.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 It was hard to... you were professional but it was hard to stand back and not be affected by what you saw and certainly on that farm that affected me most of all.  He had gone through the situation 
I had gone through. I really felt for him and I felt like keeping in touch with him at times.  I feel I should got back, you feel that you should go back and visit these people to see how they are getting on know but you can\rquote 
t get too involved, they have their own lives to get on with.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 I guess it would be good to know whether he was restocking or\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well, talking to you I don\rquote t think he had any other intention but to restock. He used to say to me about the dairy herd.  They got infected, there was no \'85 he r
ealised there was no alternative to slaughter.  He said he missed the grumpy ones the worst because they are the ones - the prickly characters -because they are the ones that cause him all the problems when he was milking and that.  A dairy herd they have
 each got their own characteristics, each cow.  So that is why we had problems with that farm.  Limousin bulls - he had some beef cattle as well, Limousins, they jumped out of pens, chaotic, we couldn\rquote t contain them. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Just when they were about to be culled?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par We had a very young field officer from DEFRA at the time but we had the army as well. By that time we were working with Field Officers the organisation was a lot of better, the disposal was a lot quicker.  
\par 
\par At that time I got pulled out and then I went to work on a landfill site, Hespin Wood, really testing work.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Could you describe a typical day for me when you were working for DEFRA?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par It just varied.  It just depended what type of site what the disposal was going to be.  On the burns site you were working from first light in the morning till it got dark basically and then sometimes after dark as long as it didn\rquote 
t get too dangerous.  A lot of problems were the access roads were very narrow for articulated wagons. When I sat down and thought why they had been pulled me off I could appreciate that we weren\rquote 
t doing what job we were possibly intended to do.   I mean towards the end of it we were standing on gates and issuing licences and paperwork and directing.   It was very difficult standing on a these ga
tes trying to issue licences in the rain, to keep all your paperwork dry.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 How did you feel when you were pulled off? 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par I felt very angry about it at the time.  But after 
it had all finished I came back to the office and sat down and really thought about it I could understand why we were pulled.  But I think I would have preferred it if the agency involved us as Field Officers in the first place.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Why were you angry?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 You j
ust felt like you were doing something useful out there you were helping, very little but you were providing a certain amount of support.  But I felt we were doing a decent job.  I felt a lot of the lads and the ladies who were appointed gatekeepers espec
i
ally from the agency were capable of being field officers on a farm.  Some of the younger people they brought in from various parts of DEFRA were immediately promoted to field officers, shipped up to Cumbria and out onto the farms.   I felt we had the exp
erience in the agency to do the job just as well as they did.
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
What was it like working on the disposal site? 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I didn\rquote t enjoy it all.  It was just shift work basically.  A lot of it was you were logging the vehicles in and out, issuing licences.  Initially
 it was a bit more involved because we were actually supervising the disinfecting work.  They had various commercial people round making sure we were doing the job proper.  I had two gangs from Liverpool who were from the high-pressure disinfectant compan
y.   The humour from them lads kept me going, they were amazing. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Scouse humour is quite notorious.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par Yes, the talk used to be not about the job you were doing but about other things really it took your mind off it.  I was amazed what they could eat while they were carrying on with this work.  I didn\rquote t enjoy it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 I guess it must have been a very unpleasant job
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Initially you were dealing with suspicion because they though you were the spy in the cab, keeping tabs on them, what they do.  I found them very pro
fessional, unbelievably so.  They did take pride it what they did. Most of the time it was cold and wet and miserable,  the Environment Agency they did something about that in the end.  When previously we were doing the gatekeeping they actually managed t
o find more caravans so people could kip down, there somewhere dry to dry off, have some lunch, get away from it, get a hot drink.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Did you get a full supply of clothing\'85
waterproofs?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par DEFRA yes, originally gave us an issue.  I did go back to the depot and g
ot clean ones, got another issue.   It was probably the district council was running the supplies by then I think the other guy had gone off with stress by then so I got whatever I wanted, it was somebody I knew.
\par 
\par On going back to Rose Hill on the second occasion which was towards the time when they came to the end of the outbreak, the organisation, the personnel and the set up there was vastly changed.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Was it?  It\rquote 
s amazing the camaraderie that can sometimes exist in these sorts of situations\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par It is amaz
ing how people pull together. I mean it has affected us all.  It has affected me. Even my sport, I play rugby and all the fixtures were cancelled.  Things got worse for the club, the club even got relegated because of foot of mouth because they couldn
\rquote t fulfil some of the fixtures. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 That\rquote s outrageous\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 They even appealed to the RFU and the local MP got involved but we got relegated.  It had an impact right through the community. They based the calculation on the past results. Somebody had to be relegated we suffered the consequences.

\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
What was it like when you saw the disposal site for the first time?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Quite amazing really, I saw carcasses I saw outside the grounds. I think it was the animal equivalent of what we had seen in the concentration camps during t
he war.  These huge pits and the smell and you never get used to that smell.  I mean sometimes it wasn\rquote t so bad if you fresh carcasses coming in but the ones that had been laying about a long time the whole scale of the thing.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Did you find that you get used to it?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well you do get used to .. well the landfill site I never did get used to the smell.   I thought it was such a waste\'85 I  maybe don\rquote t subscribe to all the conspiracy theories.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 There were an awful lot knocking around.
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par There was lot of rumourmongers going on, about changing the nature of farming.  I don\rquote 
t really subscribe to the conspiracy theory.  It worries me because I am local, I was born in Penrith.  Very proud of Cumbria. [Tape inaudible]  I am very proud of being a northerner but not excess
ively.   I just felt we felt neglected and the lack of information was very frustrating in addition to the lack of organisation, the lack of any  planning - contingency planning.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 That must have been very frustrating for you, given your background?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I had 18 years of planning in a very disciplined organisation }{\i\insrsid13262720 (the Police)}{\insrsid13262720 . It just felt like it was a shambles to be honest that is what it felt like to me.  There didn\rquote 
t seem to be any direction.  It was all reaction to what was happening. There didn\rquote t seem to be any plan as to how to get on top of the problem.  I think a lot of people felt that the Brigadier was the man who got on top of it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
So how long did you work in the disposal site?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 It would be about another month or so.  Then I got a phone call from the boss he said I think you have been out there long enough, come back in.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What did you think of that?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 I had been on disposal site.  I wasn\rquote 
t doing much.  I didn\rquote t see why the weighbridge couldn\rquote t log in log in the vehicles, issue the licences because the
y were better organised by then.  The disinfectant process was well organised by then: they had sprays on the gates and everything the wagons were cleaned down before they came on site and went through a wash system.  Everything was running smoothly by th
e
n.  I was very impressed by the company who run waste management, I had nothing but praise for the assistance they gave us.  I know we have had our run-ins with them in the past but they were all right pollution officers had problems in Cumbria at times b
ut at the time we forget about all the differences and got on with the job.  I mean they were working very long hours, longer hours than we were.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So at the end of this two-month period, how did you feel?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Very tired.  The best thing, I was lucky in a way b
ecause I was allowed to clean up and come off a couple of times during this and I was able to get away and see my children and I had a break and they took my mind of it for a short time.  But even when I came back I never got away from it.  Well I was wor
k
ing weekends as well.  I was working four days on and four off, 7 to 7, That was quite a tasking job as well because you were remote from the situation but you were liasing with all the agencies involved, processing a hell of a lot of paper. Looking at re
q
uests, things like that, there was also stuff coming in from Head Office and from the national survey so it was answering those queries as well. We learned a lot more about the [Environnment]Agency and different things working in the agency.  I met a lot 
more people in the agency working across teams.  There were them sort of benefits as well came out.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
There seemed to be a popular theory that things changed when the Army became involved.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
I think the impression was given that ooh the army is here now it is going to get better but it took a while for their sort of logistics to kick in.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What was it like when you were eventually went back to your proper job?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Very difficult, I had real problems coping with going back to the day job.  Everything had just gone.
  Nobody was able to do my day job for me, this thing impacted on a small office, even people who stayed in the office the whole time. I am still feeling the consequences of foot and mouth in that respect.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 You must have lost months of data?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Well, it is not bad, things like rainfall data we can get, it is not that bad, luckily we didn\rquote t have any major flooding at the same time, which would have been bad.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 It must have affected licences and that sort of thing
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes water resources\'85 but they were heavily involved in ground water assessment and things like that, disinfecting lagoon construction
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 So for a lot of people in the Agency, their day jobs went out of the window.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Changed dramatically.  And I felt great I had great difficult in adjusting back to my job.
  I had been away from the job for six month working in Newcastle and then gone out on the foot and mouth and I got a need for being outside I preferred being out.  It is taking a long time to adjust to being in an office all the time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 How have you handled that?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par Well I still felt I struggled with it but I have talked it over with the bosses and they keep telling me I am doing a good job and somehow I don\rquote t feel I am operating on the same level I was when I first started. It is difficult sometimes when you
 have gone through something like foot and mouth to look at flooding in the same way.  You know although I have seen some terrible effects of flooding the effects can be terrible and traumatic as well but I have never seen anything to touch what people ha
ve gone through (}{\i\insrsid13262720 FMD}{\insrsid13262720 ).
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Do you think the whole thing has changed the way you value things, situations?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes, when you have seen what people have gone through out there you start questioning your job really what you are trying to achieve.  I mean I am getting back to where I was, I hope.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Do you think your experiences are typical of others in the Agency?  
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 We did have a debrief specially for all the people who were 
involved in foot and mouth and even people who just stayed in the office but worked on things associated with foot and mouth there was a lot of discussion.  It was quite a heavy session a lot of views were aired.  I know B who was also on the panel he had
 got very strong views.  I could see where he was coming from and he thinks there was some sort of conspiracy which is for somebody working for the Government I don\rquote 
t know if it is a brave view but certainly his arguments put forward were very convincing.  You can\rquote t ignore them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Was it useful having that debriefing session?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Very, we were offered counselling and certainly at the time because of problems with my marriage breakdown and thing like that maybe I think I should go for counselling but I don\rquote t thin
k I need counselling for foot and mouth despite the gruesome things I saw.  I never want to see them again, put it that way but I felt I was able to cope with them. My view on it was more that people are out there on the farms were in a lot worse position
 than I am and they don\rquote t have counselling.  They had slaughtered stock lying about the farmyard, but I had to come off sometime.   I felt for them more than I felt for myself.
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What about now, do you get any flashbacks or bad memories around the events of last year?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 No I don\rquote t really get nightmares not now I think I did at the time.  I think some nights you came home you would switch the TV on and you couldn\rquote 
t get away from it and you went to bed and it was still spinning round in your head and you became 
a bit of a automaton.  You would get up in the morning you got your kit together and got out and even when you came home at night I used to disinfect and shampoo everything I had on.   I mean you didn\rquote 
t want to go anywhere, you kept yourself to yourself you didn\rquote 
t want to spread.   I dreaded the thought of spreading the disease or anything like that because I saw these different cattle and sheep especially cattle, so I was maybe over the top.  I think I ruined the car I had to get it re-polished, profession
ally polished because it had been pressure washed that many times.
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 
\par How often does it come into you mind now?
\par }{\insrsid13262720 
\par It is never away, it is always in the news in Cumbria, all the time.  I would read the evening paper when I got home and there used to be pages of it at one time.  It is in just now and again now but it is still there.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
I guess the whole of your life was affected as well, your social life?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes, it was to a certain extent.  I was lucky, my parents, I was living with my parents at the time but they 
were in Portugal for a month.  They went away before I went out, so when they came back it was like a war zone to them.  They had seen it on the TV but they couldn\rquote 
t believe it. When I was up at Ousby, because it was up on a height looking down the Eden va
lley.  I can remember standing at night looking down the valley and it looked like a scene I had seen from Kuwait during the Gulf War with all the pyres burning   It reminded me of all the oil wells on fire in Kuwait, it was really surreal.  I used to dri
ve back home through the Eden valley, driving through smoke.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 It must have been so strange.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes it was a very unreal experience that 
was.  My friend has got a big farm down at Eden Hall, he has got a fishery as well.  And as I was driving down the road there was a huge pyre there and piled up with soot. It was absolutely huge, I couldn\rquote t believe it and you couldn\rquote 
t see on the road you had to have the lights on - day turned to night, I couldn\rquote t believe it happened.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
Do you think these experiences have affected your health in any way?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par I don\rquote t think so.  I mean I worried about all these different disinfectants they were using and what was 
the affect on myself and on the land and whatever.  You throw disinfectant at everything yes I suppose you tried to contain it and make sure it didn\rquote 
t spread.  But I suppose you did get worried then there was all these rumours about you could catch it your
self and going in and spraying down slaughtered stock to try and stop it.  That was the only thing you could do for the farmers was try to get the smell down essentially go and spray but you tried to take as many precautions: you wore mask and goggles.  I
 shaved my moustache off actually and never grew it back again because I was wearing a mask all the time.  It made a better seal, the moustache got in the way so that came off.  I had had that moustache for years so it changed the way I looked.
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I can\rquote t fau
lt the Agency for the support we got when we were out there and even afterwards the management, especially my Department, manager.  People like Bob R and arranged all the supplies, and organised the rota were fantastic.  And even just people I worked with
 just ringing up, that phone call, your mobile phone was the only way to the office because you couldn\rquote 
t come into the office.  If you had to come and see somebody you could only come to the top of the car park full of disinfectant.  You had to hand things over in plastic bags and all sorts.  It was a strange experience.
\par 
\par You carried your phone around in a plastic bag and things like that.  Everything was in a plastic bag.  And you were worried about these health implications.  You thought, \'93 am I taking the right precautions\'94
 and you were worried it would affect you.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Were you surprised about the impact foot and mouth had on the county?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 I had heard people talk about what it was like in 1967.  My parents - my mother worked on Newton Riggs on the farms at the
 agricultural college and she worked there a long time before she retired and she can remember things like that.  I talked to them when the outbreak first broke out.  It didn\rquote 
t hit Cumbria too bad in 1967.   I think in 1958 - some of the older farmers used
 to tell me ohh in 1958 we just dug a hole, chuck them in the ground and chucked quick lime on it.  It was difficult to explain to them the world had changed, legislation had changed and they just couldn\rquote 
t do that any more.  And they said well why not this
 is the quickest way to get rid of it and as far as you can actual.  There was some criticism of the agency when they took a long time to turn round these request but the people on the office were working full time on it most requests were being assessed 
and turned round in 48 hours.  They did a fantastic job especially considering the groundwork regulations they had to look at.
\par 
\par And then the stories about pyres spreading the disease, things like that.  the cost of them was absolutely frightening.  Where th
ings where coming from spreading - we had these huge lorries we had to make sure were disinfected properly coming from Inverness with timber coal. It was   frightening really to see them come down these tiny country roads.  Contractors had to make tempora
r
y roads to get these vehicles into some of these places because they were up to their axles, they had to drag them out.  There was roadstone coming in from Shap quarries by the wagonful to establish roads they had to lay a road to get to the fire site vir
tually and even then they got bogged down.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 That must have been a massive logistical exercise?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes it was.  Initially it was just chaotic.  I mean luckily where I was working the contractors were local and some I knew and they were very good and they kne
w the farmer as well so there was no problem whatsoever they tried to help them as much as possible.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 What was the worse part about last year for you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Just the sheer waste, all the dead animals really.  I don\rquote t like to see animals suffer at all.  I mean they didn\rquote 
t suffer where we where anyway.  I think the vets generally the vets I saw were very professional. The slaughter teams I think most of them, the ones I met anywhere were fairly professional.  It was just - the pregnant ewes were worst, I think, th
at was dreadful.  We had to slaughter - there were 2000 sheep on one of the places we where and a lot of the ewes were pregnant and as they were being slaughtered they were having premature births and I wasn\rquote 
t physically sick or anything but you felt you w
ere going to be but you knew you had to get the job done and get on with it.   I saw a lad that got his dairy herd slaughtered, he stood there you should have seen his face   It just seemed such a waste.  I know stock gets slaughtered, we eat it, a lot of
 farm animals get slaughtered every year normally anyway - but not on that scale.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 The whole context changed.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Yes, definitely.
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 
\par Can you see anything good that came out of last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Actually, to be fair, it may sou
nd strange but I actually felt worthwhile being out there, I felt I was doing a worthwhile job, I got a lot out of that.  I got a lot of strength from people out there the farmers themselves, and their wives and the way they were facing things.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Have you b
een in touch with any of the farmers?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par No, it has been a bit difficult.  I felt like ringing them up and saying how are you getting on and things like that but I would rather bump into them and speak to them face to face and then you just feel like you are
 intruding.  It is difficult.  I mean I got to know a lot of people.  
\par 
\par We had one farm where there were 20 houses.  They had built a housing estate on the farm as well, of private houses, so they were all stuck on there for two weeks as well or they had t
o actually leave their houses and live off site.  It had a huge impact on them as well, their jobs.  They were working in town or Carlisle working on newspapers. It had a massive impact in the county.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 Is there anything I haven\rquote 
t asked you that you think is important?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13262720 
\par No, I just think what we were trying to achieve was worthwhile, especially if it goes back to government.  I think the social issues tend to get in the road.  It is something that does need research I mean speaking myself about flooding I kno
w how traumatic flooding can be to people who suffer flooding, flooded out of their houses virtually destroyed by flood water, it is a really traumatic experience. Certainly within the agency with flood warning it is one thing that we are looking more and
 more at the social consequences of flooding and trying to get people to react better to flood warnings to take flood warnings on board and actually do something.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 The way Defra managed things, do you thing they thought about the social effects of culling?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 Like I said for most farmers it was a traumatic experience seeing their stock slaughtered.  A lot of them couldn\rquote 
t face seeing it I know some camped out for the night but most farmers on the farms I was on were actually involved in helping to slaughter th
e stock, They wanted the team to work with them. They felt the need to be there they wanted to make sure things were done correctly 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13262720 Do you think there was any recognition of the impact of culling on the farmer and the farmer\rquote s family? It didn\rquote t seem to be part of anybody\rquote s thinking really.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid13262720 No it wasn\rquote t really it was just such a rush job it was just in, get them killed and lay them out as best you could for when disposal was going to occur but we couldn\rquote t even tell them when disposal was going to occur at
 first and that was terrible and then they were lying about for days.  That was the worse thing seeing them laying about there.  I can\rquote t imagine what that was like.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }}