{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f99\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f100\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f102\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f103\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f104\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f105\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f106\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f107\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f110\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f113\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f114\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f117\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{
\s18\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\s19\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text 2;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\*\cs22 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid11863941 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid23704\rsid7699017\rsid11863941\rsid12323915\rsid12671402
\rsid14942788\rsid16720657}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\title (  )}{\author Windows User}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr15\min26}{\version5}{\edmins24}{\nofpages29}{\nofwords10491}
{\nofchars44064}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws54396}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace0\dgvspace0\dghorigin0
\dgvorigin0\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot12671402 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid11863941 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: Lancaster University
\par Interview ID:  PM03
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid23704 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs22\insrsid11863941 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs22\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid7699017 29}}}{\cs22\insrsid11863941 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid11863941 {\insrsid11863941 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
\par }{\fs24\ul\insrsid23704 Date of Interview: 08/03/02
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid23704 Date of birth: 1966
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid23704 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 Occupation: Group 6}{\cs21\fs24\super\insrsid23704 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid11863941 \chftn }{\insrsid11863941  }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Group 1 }{
\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid11863941 

\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i0\insrsid23704 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par }\pard \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 {\insrsid23704 Tape starts part way through a conversation about the start of FMD
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 \'85yeah, its like other people say it\rquote 
s a long, long away is Essex you know its somewhere where I\rquote ve never been.  And you think well its come from a pig farm, so until you found out where the pig had come from you didn\rquote t really know where it was gonna have the focus you know.

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 Do pigs carry more FMD virus?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
Pigs excrete more virus yeah, they excrete more virus per breath, they are also quite susceptible to aerosol infection as are cattle, because they have a big lung volume.  Sheep are not as susceptible because they don\rquote 
t take in as much air with every breath.  
\par 
\par But then when it started to get up north and we had Longtown.  I mean, I come from a village that\rquote 
s about 15 miles north of Longtown, so I knew about Longtown Auction Mart. I used to take sheep there myself and knew it was a huge, huge place.  And I 
also knew that sheep could be held there for three or four days before during and after the sale before they went on to wherever.  So I just knew that there\rquote 
s gonna be some contact there, it was gonna spread.  And we just thought  at that stage we were still like, I don\rquote 
t know as if the Ministry was some sort of paternalistic organisation that they would be on top of the job and they would take care of it and we were sort of saying, \'93give it a fortnight, three weeks\'94.  We really thought that they would be d
own on it and yes, things would be upset for a month or six weeks or whatever but I felt that would be all it would take.  
\par 
\par And then we heard they were chasing sheep from Longtown and holding them rather than slaughtering them and we thought, well that is just no good at all, that\rquote 
s not gonna do it.  And then it just went on from there.  I mean, we were really quiet in February.  Bill went off to work for DEFRA, cause we all felt as if we should be doing something and there was nothing to do here because a
ll our farming clients just shut their doors and stayed at home.  
\par 
\par The small animal business went away because people thought we would be really busy because of all the Foot & Mouth [laughs].  So it was really only emergencies.  We stopped all routine far
m visits, foot trimming, fertility work, we just went for emergencies and calvings and things like that, um and did a lot of diagnosing over the telephone.  And then it started with the licenses in March and the shit just hit the pan.  One Monday some far
mers had managed to lift a couple of application forms off the internet and we hadn\rquote 
t at that stage received the guidance notes of how to complete the forms or what was involved.  So they were coming in with these application forms for licenses and that was the first time we\rquote 
d ever seen them.  On that day, I think we did 26 licenses and it was just manic all day and we\rquote ve been doing licenses ever since in one form or another.  They keep changing it, just as you sort of get the hang of it and everybody knew w
hat you need to do and what it means they go and change it onto something else, so that would mean that I\rquote m still about a week behind on the new licenses.  And being part-time as well I think it\rquote s quite hard to keep up with what\rquote 
s going on in that sort of thing.  It\rquote s easy to keep up with the personal stuff, the stuff that\rquote s actually involving the people and the animals because that\rquote s the bit that everybody goes, \'93
oh have you heard so and so and this, that and the other\'94.  But you don\rquote t walk in, in the mornings and somebody says, \'93oh by the way we\rquote ve got new forms from DEFRA with new regulations\'94 because nobody really wants to know [laugh].  

\par 
\par And then our first outbreak in this area was at the beginning of April which wasn\rquote t one of our clients it was one of
 the Appleby Vets clients. We sort of overlap a little bit and that took out 11 of our farms completely, it took cattle and sheep but that was when they were saying that \'93anybody that shares a fence will lose all their stock\'94.  And we couldn\rquote 
t believe it cause up till then we\rquote d been sort of taking the sheep and leaving the dairy cattle or beef cattle and we couldn\rquote 
t believe it.  They actually went into my village, to two farms in the village. One of them had shared um, one fence, you know one small fence wh
ere his field joined one of the infected farms fields.  And they had something like six fields between that infected farm and his home where the cattle were still inside.  And he said he would have given up the sheep but he was absolutely gutted when they
 said that they wanted his cattle, you know absolutely gutted.  Um, I mean it probably didn\rquote t turn out so bad for him because he\rquote s 60 and he isn\rquote 
t going back into milk so its taken the decision away from him, its just such a savage way of doing it.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 It must have brought it home for you as well?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
That was right on the doorstep yeah, that was just nasty.  But then you see we thought, well it shouldn\rquote t come further as there\rquote s been a huge clean out.  So although this was right in the middle of the practice and i
t put huge restrictions on a big area of the practice,  we thought that they\rquote 
ve had such a good clean out but maybe that will be it and it did sit still for a while.  And then it just started here, and there and everywhere.  And then there was one night, j
ust a mile outside Kirkby Stephen, and it went right along all the farms on the fell edge.  It was like it followed the track of the old railway and just one farm after another were getting like two or three IP\rquote 
s in a day and it was just never ending. It was just wagons and orders and detox wagons and the whole town just knew about it and that just felt as if it wasn\rquote 
t going to stop.  It just, every day there was another one and another one and another one and all of a sudden it just died out.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 How much of your client base did you loose?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Well we stopped counting, we had 210 farms at the beginning, and that
\rquote s including people that had maybe 12 or 15 sheep, sort of hobby farms.  And our biggest dairy farm was milking just over 200 cows but most of them were s
ort of like 40 to 80 cow dairy herds.  And they were sort of family farms and quite small.  Um, but we haven\rquote t really got very much idea of who lost half their stock or whatever.   We\rquote ve got someone there that\rquote 
s unmarked where the farmer had all his sheep away for winter and was left with 12 runts that weren\rquote 
t fit to go and some cows, you know that was all he was left with at home and really that should be counted as well.  But we reckoned we lost around 45% of the animals so we weren\rquote t as bad as some, some
 vets were left with 15 farms at the end of it.  So there was a huge area between Kirkby and Tebay that was really unaffected.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 Are the red dots? }{\fs24\insrsid23704 [on a map on the wall of the practice]}{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 The red dots are culls, the black dots are Appleby clients wh
ich obviously affected us by culls roundabout.  But it never got over the fell, the fell seemed to be quite a good barrier [laugh] and it didn\rquote t really get down the Lune Valley towards Tebay. 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 Right, right.  It\rquote s still quite a lot of your clients?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Oh yea
h, yeah, a lot.  Although some of them have been really upset, some of the older ones just haven\rquote 
t coped with the restrictions and regulations right from the very start its really upset them and they just haven't been able to get a handle on it at all.  Farmers [laugh] I mean I was just saying a minute before, \'93
God some of the clients are so selfish\'94.  But they just live in such an insular little world that you know they are used to doing what they want to do, when they want to do it.  They are their own bo
ss and you know their farms are important to them. They are not very good at seeing the broader picture at all, even when it comes to sort of neighbours and people with the same value and this sort of thing, they are so impatient they want everything done
 yesterday and its worse than its ever been now.  But I think we\rquote ve seen the best and the worst of this place this last year.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 Really?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
Yeah, some people have surprised me by how petty and arrogant and selfish they\rquote ve been and other folk have been quite amazing you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 Well I guess people cope in different ways\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Of course they do yeah.  Yeah,  some of the folk that you\rquote 
d think would just take it in their stride have really, really, really got aggressive and um, I\rquote ve mentioned before the chap had got his 
blood results back on Monday and immediately went to the auction, first auction that we've had in Kirkby all year and it was the first time he'd felt clean enough to go out.  Well he\rquote 
s quite easy going and I thought he was coping really well, getting his cleaning done and his restock and all the rest of it.  And he says, \'93I can\rquote t believe folk have said how dreadful it is and how terrible it is\'94. Because he said, \'93
after all its only animals\'94 and his a real good stock winner, thinks a lot of his animals, but his son had cancer, he\rquote 
s just a young chap. I think his got a different perspective to a lot of folk cause he sort of thinks as long as he stays into the house, that\rquote s something you know, that you can survive and you can move on and get on with it.  But I 
was surprised when he said that he felt dirty.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 I think a few people that we\rquote 
ve spoke to have come out with similar sort of things they didn\rquote t feel clean, they felt dirty, they felt guilty\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Yeah,  yeah, yeah.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 They didn\rquote t feel they wanted to go out and socialise.

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 No, no, I think they felt really, they\rquote 
d almost put a restriction on themselves really.  Cause while the farms were empty they really weren\rquote t, they weren\rquote t that restricted, so basically that\rquote s clean just as it was before but it was still all in their minds.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 How has your practice been this year?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 It\rquote s been a really good year.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid23704 Has it?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Yeah.  Because we\rquote 
ve had much lower overheads, the drug sales have been right down so we haven\rquote t had to purchase stock like we normally do.  Um, and we are charging for our time which is something that we don\rquote 
t usually charge a lot for and so its been time and effort that\rquote s brought the money in.  So profit-wise it will be a very good year.  It\rquote s not been professionally satisfying until recently.  The work that we\rquote r
e doing now getting people restocked, it feels as if you\rquote re doing a good job.  A lot of the stuff we did before was a waste of \'85\'85 well I thought it was a waste of time.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Really?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
Yeah, because we were visiting farms weekly to do surveillance visits because we didn\rquote 
t want DEFRA to go in so they nominated the local vets to do it and we were going to places with exceptional stock really.  In a way it was easy for us because by that stage we almost felt as if it was the farmers and the local vets against DEFRA 
rather than all three of us against Foot & Mouth, and that was a general feeling around here.  And especially in the areas \'85\'85
 cause we found quite a lot of areas that had no actual restrictions on the farms they were out with three kilometres of an IP and 
so the people that were on restrictions got a handle on it and could cope with applied licenses to spread muck and all the rest of it.  And the people that had never been on a form D at all just didn\rquote 
t want DEFRA to come.  They were just frightened that they were gonna bring the virus.  And we sort of said to them, \'93well look we go from farm to farm as well and this is an infected area and we have got cases blowing up every day so we\rquote 
re just as likely\'85\'94 but they\rquote d say \'93but you wouldn\rquote t do it, you wouldn\rquote t mean to do it because your our vet and you would be doing the best for us [laugh] that you could, you know\'94
.  I thought well yeah of course we would but you know, I think TVI\rquote s were very conscientious, I mean the ones I saw in our village were very conscientious, and when we say we felt we were against DEFRA, very few of them were against the actual TVI
\rquote s that they met, it\rquote s the organisation, not the individuals to be honest.  If you look at it again it\rquote s the slow lumbering way that everything works and havi
ng to phone and phone and phone to get an answer to simple questions you know, they are not used to doing that. 
\par 
\par I just dread to think of the vets that would be at Carlisle, we regularly saw maybe two vets from Carlisle um, they also had a sub office in Kendal and you know it was county-wide. That\rquote s a huge area to be able to respond to.  
\par 
\par On the other hand state vets in the ministry, in DEFRA, they\rquote re the ones that know how to respond to swine fever in pigs and FMD you know, they know what its about, we don\rquote t see it every day.  I didn\rquote 
t even pay attention at college when they were talking about FMD because I thought oh, if I go abroad you know.  Um, and we sort of rely on them to know.  Maybe that\rquote s silly but as I said before this broke out they were sort 
of paternal that they would look after us and see us all right.  And I was always a bit in awe of the vets from the ministry because whenever they came here it was to make sure that they were doing this right, that right, had the right equipment to do the
 LVI work.  And they would come and you know examine \'85\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Sorry, what is LVI?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 
Er local veterinary inspectors.  So we do like TB testing and exporting of animals on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture as it was.  Um, and so we have to have the right equipment to do all these things and they come and check and they\rquote 
ll tell you if you have the files in the wrong order you know from the information they\rquote ve sent.  And we were like, before they came, everybody was scurrying and tidying and getting all the ministry stuff sorted so that we wouldn\rquote 
t be in trouble.  And now I just think, if they come and give us hassle I\rquote ll you know, I just wouldn\rquote t take it seriously.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 
Yeah, other people have said that it has really affected the way they think about government departments and about politicians
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Oh and politics.  I mean, I\rquote 
ve never been very interested in politics but hearing politicians talking about all this and farming and rushing through the animal welfare bill, whatever they call it, this \'93we can slaughter on suspicion\'94
.  And I just think oh God you know, can people not decide for themselves?  But it was the same with BSE \'93oh you can\rquote t sell meat on the bone\'94.  But tell people what the risks are let them decide for themselves, we\rquote 
re grown ups you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\i0\insrsid23704 Have you become more cynical?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 Definitely and much shorter tempered.  I mean, I\rquote 
m really quite an easy- going person.  My tempers always been maybe quick, it\rquote ll flare and go and I will never hold grudges.  I couldn\rquote t go back and recall who\rquote d upset when and what it was about.  But oh, you know\'85that\rquote 
s what I mean about some of the farmers. They say things like \'93I\rquote ve been on to Trading Standards they\rquote ve told me I can move my sheep as long as I get permission from the local vet\'94
.  And you just think listen, if you phone them to ask them something listen to what they say, they couldn\rquote t have possibly have told you that, you know.  But you have to say things like \'93now then I think there\rquote 
s been a bit of a misunderstanding\'94 and you have to bite your lip all the time, what you really want to say is \'93you just do what you want to, you know, get a grip, pay attention, and read the notes before you come in here waffling\'94
.  And we've had 
to do an awful lot of filling in forms for farmers and things like that.  The younger ones are good you know cause they are used to filling in forms and all the rest of it.  They know how to work with the system rather than against it, but the old ones re
ally struggled with it all.  And they don\rquote t want to change [laugh]. 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid23704 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \li284\ri284\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin284\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid23704 But you can see where they\rquote 
re coming from, to be hit by that just must have been \'85..well it just changed everybody\rquote s world upside down.  And I mean you know there\rquote s a lot of people affected by bureaucracy that weren\rquote t affected by Foot & Mouth and they
\rquote re the ones that I really feel sorry for.  The farmer\rquote s wife that was still weeping the day that their hogs came back 14 months after they\rquote d gone off to winter and they were the only sheep th
at they had left at all you know.  But you can pick them out, there\rquote s a handful.  Most of them have done very nicely out of it, thank you.  Um, it\rquote 
s given them breathing space to think what do they wanna do?  Do they wanna milk cows, do they want to fatten
 beasts, do they want to have sheep again?  Um, do they want to wait till summer to see what the prices are gonna do and whether its worthwhile.  Um, but the ones that were stuck with stock and couldn\rquote 
t sell anything and were already eating winter silage i
n the middle of summer, um they really struggled.  And there are quite a few good farmers that have admitted that they went to the Royal Agricultural Benevolent Fund and were getting like a thousand pounds or you know a wagon of silage or whatever.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Mmmmm it\rquote s such a complicated relationship as well between farmers and their livestock.  I think that\rquote s a thing that a lot of public have a problem getting their head round\'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Because they are gonna die in the end anyway, yeah.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 So what\rquote s the difference, I mean, what\rquote s it all about?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I know, I know, yeah.  But yeah you can have maybe different feelings in one farmer between him and his livestock but certainly between different farms and between different groups of them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah this is interesting.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 You know becaus
e like dairy farmers have a one to one relationship with the cattle, they know them as individuals because they are handling them twice a day.  The calves off them may or may not be that important because the bull calves might get shot.  I mean that was a
nother thing I\rquote d never thought I would see, baby calves being shot because they were worth a fiver. So a lot of the dairy farmers will just sell the calves for somebody else to fatten or whatever.  So that\rquote 
s not an important thing.  But then the people that sell prime beef cattle always want to take you through their shed that\rquote 
s got the ones that are nearly ready to go because they are slink and shiny and fit and they are double muscled and they are this, that, and the other.  And they always want to show yo
u because they do have a pride in them, but they could be dead in a week or a fortnight.  But they\rquote ve made a good job of them and they are super looking animals and they are going to be among the best of what they\rquote 
re bred for.  And most of them do have a pride in what they produce.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Mmmmm. I can see with dairy cattle how strong bonds develop
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yeah.  You see round here there\rquote s places where they\rquote re really into breeding, some of the sons will read flock groups and pedigrees as a hobby you know they are just so into it, breeding. They\rquote ll say, \'93
oh these ten hogs here will buy such and such a tup that was such and such that sold for \'a328,000 and it was a really good tup because\'94 \'85\'85. You know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Its incredible isn\rquote t it?  They trace blood lines and \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yeah, yeah, now commercial people, commercial sheep dealers don\rquote t, a mule is a mule is a mule and they are not bothered, they\rquote re sheep.  And they are probab
ly more realistic in a lot of ways because the attributes that they have in their sheep are things that are actually commercially valuable, you know, it gives a lot of milk, it can rear twins, its got a good length so are they are gonna get a longer carca
ss you know.  Not just that it\rquote s got a really nice tiny white spot at the end of its nose and that looks nice, you know. But its just lifestyle.  I always think ours is not a job it is a way of life.  I come in here on my days when I\rquote 
m off because I just come in to make sure that there\rquote s no licenses that need doing that have come back from DEFRA.  There\rquote s nothing waiting, there\rquote 
s nobody phoned up to say that they need another prescription for their particular dog that I\rquote ve been seeing, you know, just to keep
 up you know.  And when I was off on maternity leave I just missed it so much you know, I felt as if I was missing out altogether even though we\rquote d missed doing all the normal work and its been paper pushing.  I\rquote 
ve spent four hours this morning doing paper 
work and that was never my department you see [laugh].  The assistant does the practical, physical work and sees animals and de-horns cattle and all the rest of it.  I never had to do anything with paper work much before and now its part of my job.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 So has it been a stressful year for you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Well yeah I\rquote ve been stressed on odd days.  I haven\rquote t got to the stage where I\rquote ve been sort of pacing the floor in the middle of the night, things like that.  I\rquote 
ve been very frustrated at times on behalf of other people too, not just ourselves because of the lack of communication.  Um, the intricacies, the lack of common sense, not just in the actual outbreak but in the licensing and regulations.  I\rquote 
ve cried when people have lost stock and they\rquote ve told me about it.  If you
 phoned somebody up to see if they were all right and she said she was gonna feed her pet lamb before they got slaughtered, that just did me in.  But even now talking to farmers if they say something  it can still catch me and I find myself filling up.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 I heard a story about a dairy farmer who\rquote s stock was being culled the next day, he went to town and he bought three or four boxes of apples to give them a treat before they were culled.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 That\rquote s how people treat their dogs when they are putting them down, they\rquote re often feeding them chocolate or something that they wouldn\rquote t normally be allowed to have, just as much as they wanted.  I\rquote 
ve had two horses put down in the last three years, I feed them while they are getting put down.  Or I get somebody else to while I\rquote m putting them down, just to try and keep everything normal and\'85its like people, you know some folk couldn
\rquote t stand it and went in the house, other people felt as if they\rquote d be there till the very end.  And I can understand that because that\rquote s how I feel, that I have to be there till my animal is dead if I\rquote 
m putting it down or its getting put down.  I feel once they\rquote re dead they are dead to me and the pictures of heaps of sheep and heaps of cattle don\rquote t bother me at all cause they are dead and they don\rquote t f
eel anything.  But the thought of having dead stock lying in your yard that should be livestock and the smell and everything else, I think that is just abysmal because those farmers would have been taken to court if they\rquote 
d left livestock lying dead and that just goes against the grain.  They do not like having stuff lying around dead.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It\rquote s just terrible.  I\rquote ve talked to farmers who have photographs of stock lying dead in the yard and stories of kids having to go out the bedroom windows to get out the house.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I know, }{\insrsid16720657 [}{\i\insrsid16720657\charrsid16720657 name removed}{\insrsid16720657 ]}{\insrsid23704  said that as well and he said, \'93you know they really didn\rquote t think\'94
 slaughter animals in byres and things and then he said, \'93you know before they\rquote d been picked up they\rquote d gone stiff and bloated and  you couldn\rquote t get them out the doors\'94.  You know there\rquote 
s just the lack of common-sense and not all the slaughter men, but a lot of the slaughter men came from abattoirs and they\rquote re used to everything being organised and the animals coming in the crate, shoot them and down, on a line, and away.  Now 
the folk who seemed to cope with the situation best were the ones that were used to hunt kennels and from knacker yards. They are used to coming onto farms, corner the animal in a pen and just get the best shot they could, you know.  And they were sort of
 thinking about how to get them out again and what was dangerous and what was safe.  But um, we were all horrified when we heard about chasing them about and shooting them with rifles cause that\rquote s \'85\'85
.  But then after that I talked to three farmers that had had cows shot outside with the rifle.  One lot was a herd that would have flown mad if we\rquote 
d started rounding them up, and they would have ended up God knows where. The farmer said they never bothered, they had two dairy herds to be shot one outside, cause he didn\rquote t want it in his yard and he said he didn\rquote 
t really want to be there.  And then he said he couldn\rquote t hear anything happening so he sort of went down this other road so he could see across. The rifle was silenced and he said they were just grazing, an
d he says one of them dropped and the next cow would just raise its head, look over and then go back to grazing. They don\rquote t have the same concept of death that we do, I\rquote 
m sure they do understand death because often animals will be quite interested in a mate that\rquote s died.  But you see lambs on top of dead sheep, they just use it like another pillow, you know there\rquote 
s no sort of dread or respect for death or fear of death or dead bodies, you know they don\rquote t have the same sort of thing that we have about \'85\'85 that you treat people with some sort of dignity and respect.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 That\rquote s really interesting, I\rquote ve talked to people involved with the slaughter teams, they felt that the animals could smell death. 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I don\rquote t know that its death, I think its things that are not part 
of their routine, if you go into a building to test cows, just a routine TB test or something, as soon as you start doing something different they start messing about and run to the other end of the shed.  But um, I mean I can walk into a byre and I will 
interrupt and upsetting the cows sometimes because I\rquote m a vet, sometimes because I\rquote 
m a woman, they are not used to seeing anybody else.  But definitely if you do anything out of the ordinary they start getting wound up.  But some of the slaughter-men were so brave. }{\insrsid12323915 [}{\i\insrsid12323915\charrsid12323915 name removed}{
\insrsid12323915 ]}{\insrsid23704 
 was telling me about a fella that went, they were doing some bulls in a shed and um, he went in the pen they shot one and it dropped and the rest high-tailed it round this pen, galloping and bucking and then they came back and stood, and they 
shot another one, and they went off again.  He said by the time they shot the third one, they all just stood and looked and they just popped them off one after another.  
\par 
\par Death I can cope with, if there\rquote s good reason for it, but if you start putting down 
cows just because well the wagons coming anyway and that ones pretty lame and she will have to go shortly, she might as well go today, that feels a bit like its for our benefit not for hers.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah, it became kind of industrialised death.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yeah, I thought well \'85\'85 I mean I didn\rquote t go to work for DEFRA because we only had the two vets left here and because I\rquote ve got a son that\rquote 
s less than 2 now, so he was less than 1 when all this started. And they wanted people for 3 weeks and I just couldn\rquote t do that.  But I th
ought I could probably have worked at Great Orton, like if I was slaughtering.   I could slaughter at somewhere like Great Orton where they were coming through in batches with no human attachment.  And I thought I\rquote 
d really, really struggle on a farm cause I would be in the kitchen weeping in my tea with the rest of them, I would though.  I mean, I\rquote 
m quite good at detaching myself and getting on with the job but once it was over I would be in a real mess, that would really get to me.  But if you slaughter here, you know, we couldn\rquote t get animals moved, we couldn\rquote 
t sell them and there was just no way because I mean all the rendering facilities were being taken up by over 30 month cows and things.  
\par 
\par I went and did a welfa
re slaughter on some Swaledales that would have gone as light lambs, had everything been normal.  And the only way they could get them away quickly was at that stage was to slaughter them on farm and take them just as dead weight.  And it was fine, the fa
r
mer was there and we got them all organised and penned up and the slaughter-man was excellent, every one was individually sorted by the pair of us and shot and checked before we went on to the next one but we had a bit of trouble with some of the tups, th
e tups wouldn\rquote t drop, but it did drop them but it wouldn\rquote 
t kill them.  And so you had to go up and get them with a pistol.  Um, but he was so conscientious, I mean, he just made sure that he was in the furthest corner of the pen pointing away from everybody
 else and everybody knew that he was gonna shoot it and it was grand.  And I waded through, you know, we ended up trampling over sheep and you know catching the next one and doing it and that was fine.  And I felt it was something I would have hated to do
 
normally cause it was a waste you know, never mind anything else, they were just going into landfill across in the north-east somewhere.  Um, and I thought why are they not marketing sort of you know, nuclear family-sized lamb joints or something?  Why ar
e
 they not taking a chance?  This is the problem, why are they not trying to make something positive out of it?  Why are they not selling these lambs to butchers for a fiver you know.  And I just felt they were tipping these into the back of a wagon and it
 was just a waste, and I thought is this how its gonna be?  Are these hill lambs that won\rquote 
t fatten in five months, are they just gonna be a waste of profit?  You just began to sort of think, well farmers definitely gonna change, is it gonna change for the b
etter or the worse?  Are we gonna lose the fells, are they not gonna survive with the subsidies?  You just felt that this is \'85\'85
. And then DEFRA, they were so desperate to get sheep you know, all the battles that I ever had on a one to one basis with DEFRA 
were trying to save fell sheep that meant something to somebody and obviously meant a bit to us too. They were just desperate to get sheep off the fells and they just wouldn\rquote t listen to any reason.  There was no scientific\'85well they wouldn
\rquote t even enter into debate about it, they wouldn\rquote 
t give you the reasons for why they wanted them and they would change their minds, you know, one day an epidemiologist would say that all these sheep will be all right you can keep them.  And then the following day somebody e
lse would be on the phone going, \'93we\rquote re coming for your fell sheep\'94.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It must have been so frustrating professionally\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 You just felt as if you were excluded, that you weren\rquote t important enough to bother with or that you were just a thorn in their side and were probably spoiling what had become a nice plan. And that\rquote 
s the thing that you do, if somebody doesn\rquote t tell you, give you a valid reason that you can believe, then you start thinking oh, do they want all the fell sheep in Cumbria, they left sheep here and there, they\rquote 
ve left crossbreds and in other places they went five miles to take fell sheep you know. I don\rquote t know if you\rquote ve heard anything else about it?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 No
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 From Orton, the fell goes all the way right up towards Shap.  And there\rquote s over 2,000 sheep on there in different hefts, you know how they\rquote 
re all supposed to stay in their own place.  And a few tested positive after the blood testing at the far end and they came and they took every single sheep off that fell.  Now to me a few positives meant that the virus wasn\rquote t spreading, it hadn
\rquote t gone rife, to me that was proof that it didn\rquote t spread on a fell, they had to take them all off.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 So what was going on?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I don\rquote t know, I don\rquote t know.  And there\rquote s lots of sort of folk tales that oh, they would spread on the fell because its acid or its alkaline or its this or they\rquote 
re too far apart.  There is not the stocking density, there is not the pressure on and it was spread on the fell.  But DEFRA would say that and even on something like that where you\rquote ve got you kno
w, even if it was a dozen sheep, even if it was 20 sheep, percentage wise it was nothing you know.  
\par 
\par And now we\rquote ve had a positive antibody test in one of the sentinels, she might well have had when she came cause she wasn\rquote t tested before she went on.  And
 they took her and tested her for a virus, you know infection, and there was nothing, so they just took the one sheep.  And they could have taken his whole farm out if it had been in July and that inconsistency has been really hard to cope with.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It must be really difficult\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 For everything else we were working on the facts that we know that yes, every now and again they\rquote ll be something new turns up, they\rquote 
ll be a new development, something else to put into your data bank [laugh] you know.  But for the most part lung disease is lung disease, heart disease is heart disease, you know the parameters you\rquote 
re looking at you know what treatments are available. You try and update yourself with new treatment, the investigation techniques, whatever.  But you can sort of stand in and say to somebody \'93if it doesn\rquote t respond we\rquote ll x-ray, we\rquote 
ll ultra sound, we\rquote ll blood test, we\rquote ll do this\'94.  You can have a plan, you can sort of say \'93this might happen, that might happen\'94 and know that you\rquote ve covered all eventualities.  But with FMD there\rquote 
s just too many outside forces. I think, I felt that we were letting our clients down because we weren\rquote t able to give them the information, we weren\rquote 
t able to give them the support that I would have liked to have given.  But it was very draining trying to give them the support that I would have liked to have given them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah, you must have become counsellors to a certain extent.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yes its still going on now.  But at the start we made a real effort to contact everybody as soon as we heard they were gonna be culled as IP\rquote s or DC\rquote 
s we phoned them right away and often got information from them about neighbours and what was happening.  But after a while we couldn\rquote t keep up and certainly we were getting sort of two or three IP\rquote s an hour and all the DC\rquote 
s associated with that and we just couldn\rquote t keep up and we couldn\rquote 
t get enough information as to who was being culled out.  And then you start worrying about what if you miss out somebody so we just had to stop.  But it was just so tiring.  One night I wa
s on the phone for three hours talking to people that were about to be culled in the next day and that\rquote s really, really hard.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It just wears you down, doesn\rquote t it because you do it again, again, and again.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yes, and then you phone somebody up, \'93how\rquote s it going?\'94  You know thinking they were gonna get culled and they say, \'93oh well actually we\rquote re not getting culled because we\rquote ve decided that we\rquote 
re not gonna let them cull until whatever\'94.  And then somewhere in a round about way we discovered that the samples didn\rquote 
t even get sent to the lab.  So they sent out some South African who had a lot of experience with Foot & Mouth, very practical, that will stand and tell the farmer he might as well go today because your gonna go in the next fortnight anyway and persuade
 them to give up their stock. The farmer\rquote 
s that had Foot & Mouth wanted to tell me exactly what happened.  On the day from thinking there was something wrong to getting them in and finding it and what it was in and how many and then what happened when they
 phoned DEFRA and then the man came out, they want to go through an absolute blow by blow account.  And some of them are still doing it now.  You know there\rquote s some sort of process that \'85\'85 maybe people do that over death, I don\rquote 
t know, you know or illnesses in hospital you know that you have to go and see what the consultant said and you know, if there\rquote s anything sort of serious and life changing\'85they\rquote 
re still doing it now.  I mean, Brian yesterday called for an occupational license, he\rquote s re-stocking now, he
 was left with which was a handful of heifers and handful of sheep.  But he told me again all about what happened on the day that they were slaughtered. They\rquote ve talked to everybody else that\rquote s been affected or infected or whatever.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah and their neighbours or \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yes, yeah, and their relations.  I suppose an area like this everybody does know everybody.  Normally they have their pals that they would normally go out on a Saturday night for a meal with and this sort of thing.  And they haven\rquote 
t been frightened to talk and you think grown men don\rquote t cry but they have talked to each other and they have got upset and showed it you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It isn\rquote t very Cumbrian is it
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 No it\rquote s the wives that have been very stoical.  I\rquote ve been more worried about the wives actually than the fellars cause the wives they just do everything, you know, absolutely amazing.  I don\rquote 
t know how they do it but they cook, clean, and do work, help out on the farm, you know, look after grandchildren and go to the WI and make jam.  You know they still do that round here, they\rquote 
re still proper housewives [laugh] and probably work in the Co-op part time as well you know [laugh].  They\rquote ll  be the ones that have the pressure on I would think, they are the ones that have to keep everything soldiering on.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 What about you, what helped you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Being able to talk definitely.  I\rquote m always that way though, my husband\rquote s a good listener who doesn\rquote t talk a lot [laugh] he works for Agricultural Engineers so they were involved too in a lot of ways
.  They had a run on pressure washers and platforms for cleanings roofs and things that they don\rquote t normally sell a lot of, people buying their own equipment so they didn\rquote 
t have to get contractors in.  But um, now you see things like that you know, people will be quite happy for any Tom, Dick or Harry to come and make silage and you know.  You can use the same contractor year after year after year and you think, well they
\rquote ve got a relationship and then something like this happens.  And you think oh well, oh he goes to Appleby, oh \'85\'85. And there was definitely a sort of like local protection sort of thing, where they didn\rquote t want to risk it.  I don
\rquote t know that there\rquote s that much evidence of contractors really doing a lot of harm.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah, do you think its over?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I won\rquote t say its over till lambing\rquote s finished.  I won\rquote t.  Well I\rquote m not just convinced that we\rquote ll hear [laugh] anything if there is a bit if a flare up, I don\rquote t think we\rquote 
ll hear anything much from DEFRA if we hear anything it will be gossip.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 What do you think about the vaccination issue?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Well I thought it is only sensible but I don\rquote t know enough about it.  And you see we were getting stories that, oh well it wouldn\rquote t necessarily stop them spreading the virus if they were already infected it wouldn\rquote 
t stop them flaring up afterwards and they would have to be slaughtered.  And I thought that seems to be a bit savage because our farmers didn\rquote 
t want to wait three days for a slaughter never mind three months or six months or a year.  But the cattle, I mean, they\rquote re all individually marked they would easily know which were which and why they couldn\rquote 
t go into the food chain anyway I don\rquote t know because we vaccinate them for other things, why is FMD different? We vaccinate against diseases, pneumonia, viruses, diarrhoe
a, all sorts of things and nobody makes any mention about it. It will just be the exports as far as I can see.  And all we needed was for the EU to say, \'93oh it doesn\rquote t matter that you\rquote 
ve put vaccinated cattle in Cumbria you can still export\'94 and it would have been all right.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Do you think there was a contingency plan to deal with an outbreak on such a scale?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 No didn\rquote t seem to be.  Well I never heard any mention of anything.  I mean we\rquote re local veterinary inspectors for the ministry and I suppose we\rquote re li
ke the territorial army, if you like, if they wanted us we have sort of already got an allegiance with them, um they know how to get in touch with us.  Um, but there\rquote 
s never any mention.  When I first started to become an LVI you have to go and do a superv
ised test with the vet from the ministry and go up to Carlisle to see slides of anthrax so you know how to recognise it when you are looking for it.  But there is never any training days on Foot & Mouth or swine fever \'85
.. well swine fever is not a problem up here really cause we haven\rquote t got that many pig farms.  But they don\rquote t sort of have refresher courses on infectious diseases to keep everybody sort of up to speed.  
\par 
\par Um, I mean we\rquote ve all heard the stories about the preparations that were supposed to be made in November but that\rquote s rumour and gossip isn\rquote 
t it?  And that might have been something to do with this suspected level of BSE in sheep.  They may well have been trying to ascertain what would happen if they decided to cull half of the sheep flock beca
use of BSE or scrapie resistance.  And they might have just been saying, \'93dare we start on this plan and have we got the facilities to get rid of what we\rquote re gonna have to get rid of?\'94
  It might not have been anything to do with Foot & Mouth at all, give them the benefit of the doubt. I think that from November to February\rquote 
s too long to think that they knew Foot & Mouth, I think, to see how it went from February till May, you know from November to February it would have been all over the country by the time 
they admitted.  You know it would have been obvious before then if they\rquote d been thinking oh we\rquote re gonna have an outbreak of Foot & Mouth lets see what we\rquote 
ve got.  I think that must have been something of a, some other plot that they had going on [laugh].
\par 
\par Why can\rquote t people be more honest because as I say the meeting that we had you know, people do cope with bad news.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 If they have the truth.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 If they have the truth\'85 if they\rquote re shot, you can be horrified, you can be upset, but you eventually come to terms with it and do your best to you know get over it if you\rquote 
re in a new situation.  But its when the goal posts keep moving on, disappear altogether you just can\rquote t cope, people don\rquote t work like that.  And they didn\rquote t get a handle on that right through, they didn\rquote 
t know to approach farmers \'93We are coming to see you, we see you have not had a visit.  We are coming to see your stock\'94 \'85\'85 its just no good. Why not say something like, \'93l
ook your in a protection zone and all the animals are to be inspected, when would it suit you for us to come?\'94
  You know, instead of just like being normal and civil and polite, they almost presumed they were gonna be denied access before they are ever asked, I don\rquote t know.  Its just, they had such an awkward manner with everybody.
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 
\par }{\insrsid23704 They didn\rquote t have much idea if farmers were farming at all because round here there was an awful lot of broken up farms with a field here and a field there and that all the regula
tions were designed for a farm that was down a track with a farm house in the middle and all the fields close by you know.  The people that had sheep stuck in two fields that were three miles away from home couldn\rquote 
t get them home, they were in a different parish, and this sort of thing.  You know one farmer eventually said, \'93
look would you like one lot of sheep to move once on one day or would you like me to go out everyday with a dirty tractor and an old bale of silage?\'94  and then they said \'93oh well when you put it that way we\rquote 
ll do something about moving your sheep\'94. They were on about cutting down journeys and contact between things but yet the common sense part never came into play unless you actually spelt it out unless you were threatening to shoot you
rself or do something dramatic and then they\rquote ll go \'93oh right\'94.  They lost people\rquote s licenses, moved porter cabins and forgot to take the files with them, what way is that to run anything? I mean we\rquote 
re just drowning in paper, our important stuff is filed, the stuff that we definitely know is important, over there is the stuff that we don\rquote t know whether we need to keep or not so it\rquote s pending.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Gosh it\rquote s a massive pile of paper work.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 This is only a little three-vet practice you know with half its stock gone.  But you see the important stuff is safe in files, filed away and that is just stuff that keeps getting sent or whatever.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 What do you think was the worse thing about last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 The lack of communication, the frustration and the feeling of being powerless.
 Frustration that we are supposed to be looking after our clients and our animals, and not being able to do it and not being able to do a good job for them, that you were at everybody else\rquote 
s mercy.  All power was taken away from us you know, we had no say.
  Normally people come to us with a problem and depending on the situation, you may want to take samples or you might want to try this treatment or that treatment and you do something about it and you aim to sort it out for them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 You obviously know the area well, you know the farmers well, why weren\rquote t you asked to help?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Mmmmm, well I don\rquote t know.  We would have liked it if they\rquote d actually based maybe a veterinary officer here, which is like the level above TVI. They could have had a veterinary officer in K
irkby, sort of supervising if you like, and had maybe a handful of TVI\rquote s working under him.  He could have had the ultimate say as to whether people could move things, what was a dangerous contact what wasn\rquote 
t. And he would have got to know the area well and the TVI\rquote s would have known all the farmers and how everybody\rquote 
s land fitted together and who was where and if those sheep had moved from that field all of a sudden or whatever.  They would have had a much better idea of the locality and the disease risks and you know the problems that have been incurred.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It just seems sensible
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yeah, apparently they do that in sort of Zimbabwe I think, they just decamp to where the disease is and set up there and just go for it, do whatever they have to do.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Right, can you think of anything positive which came out of last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Yes I think there\rquote s gonna be some things, farming wasn\rquote t in a brilliant way anyway.  Up here its quite a short growing season and a lot of the smaller milk herds weren\rquote t making money, they\rquote re not g
etting a big price per litre and they are also getting hammered with collection charges.  Um, and folk that lost their entire stock have a chance to sit back, time to think and sit down. Farms have got cleaned up and things have got repaired that needed r
epairing and they\rquote ve had a chance to reflect and to think and decide what they want to do.  And if they decide they want to jump right back in farming even though they weren\rquote t making the money before then that\rquote 
s their fault.  Because they\rquote ve had a good chance and they\rquote ve had money in the bank that\rquote s possibly earning more interest than they were ever earning before, but its not the money, its occupational, life-style or, I don\rquote 
t know.  Um, the ones that weren\rquote t committed farmers, we haven\rquote t got that many, there\rquote s been an odd farmer\rquote 
s son decided to jump and go and do something else.  And others have decided not to go back into milk but they are still farmers.  But the older ones, you know they are not looking for a huge income and if they can occupy themselves
, have a bit of income and sit on what\rquote 
s left then you know they will probably do all right.  What I have noticed is the ones that have restocked have restocked for the most part with as good quality animals as they can get and gone for fewer pedigree animals if possible.  Um, so that\rquote 
s quite nice that they\rquote re keeping maybe fewer animals.  That each ones individually worth more and that is good for us because they\rquote ll take more care if you know, they\rquote ve specifically chosen this, this, and this and they\rquote re pe
digree and they are obviously worth that bit more.  So hopefully they will go for quality instead of quantity.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Have you noticed a kind of transition process, post-FMD into the restocking phase?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Some have brought it on themselves um, in a way.  We\rquote ve an odd farmer that has maybe come face to face with DEFRA a bit too much.  Um, one in particular gave DEFRA a lot of trouble after he\rquote d been culled, he didn\rquote 
t think he should have been culled obviously a lot of them didn\rquote t, but a lot of them just sort of sat polite and accepted it.  He didn\rquote t and he gave them all a hassle.  And when it came to this document it was DEFRA\rquote 
s turn to do him a lot of harm [laugh] and just be awkward. Its taken him a long, long time to get through the restocking process and I 
know he has a couple of farmers that he phones nearly every day.  So he is still agitated and only last night talked for half an hour about DEFRA.  Um, not about his Foot & Mouth or his quality of care but about DEFRA and the people on the end of the phon
e and he is much, much more easily wound up, I don\rquote t know what you call it, anxiety.  But his sort of tolerance cut-off points is altered.  But then I think mine has as well a bit.
\par 
\par It\rquote s dreadful because that organisation should have been for farm animals rather than farmers, but it should have looking after the best interests of both. I mean that doesn\rquote 
t mean just like not slaughtering animals but really assessing what needs to be done.  
\par 
\par They haven\rquote t really been that cooperative in farming in a long time. We\rquote ve had DEFRA on a couple of farms where stock hasn\rquote t been well looked after for one reason or another, and um, they\rquote 
ve been terrible, not very cooperative on the animals behalf I would say. It\rquote s not that we didn\rquote t want the farmers prosecuted but we did want them supervised and back on the right track sort of thing.  We didn\rquote 
t want to get the RSPCA in cause they\rquote re often looking for a court case and a bit of publicity to generate more funds.  I feel that they are looking to prosecute.  We are just wantin
g things to improve really.  And sort of visiting them every six months and all sorts can happen in six months to a farm.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Is there anything that I haven\rquote t asked you that you think is important?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I know farming\rquote s got to change and some of them are embracing the old land management and conservation and are quite happy to do so as long as they get paid for it.  But other ones still feel that that\rquote 
s interference. We suffered a lot of sheep losses here, and because a lot of the farmers were being paid to take t
he sheep off the fells over the winter and they were getting paid more than it was costing them to have them out of the way so they were making a profit on it.  So they all took it up.  So a lot of people have sheep away from home that we don\rquote 
t know much about you know.  Um, and to me that\rquote s an interference.  I think people interfere too much with fell sheep they shouldn\rquote 
t really be carried off 16 miles down the valley, fell sheep should be fell sheep really.  But you know, there was a lot disappeared early on in the outbreak that weren\rquote t anywhere near them. 
\par 
\par I think that was quite hard for a lot of people because they felt very out of it when somebody phoned up and said, \'93look we\rquote ve got Foot & Mouth and they are coming for your sheep can you send a valuer\'94 and they couldn\rquote 
t go themselves.  I think they felt as if they should \'85\'85.  I don\rquote t know whether they should have gone to make sure everything went all right or gone to say cheerio to the sheep or just had to be there because they were their sheep or you k
now.  I mean it\rquote s the same at the auction when they go for slaughter, they don\rquote t feel as if they have to be on the wagon that takes them to the slaughter house.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 It\rquote s the context isn\rquote t it I guess?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 I think so, I think its just the way things go and its just what people get used to and what\rquote s always happened.  I think its just been so strange its really \'85
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 How do you think the compensation issue was handled?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 You shouldn\rquote t call it compensation it\rquote s compulsive purchase. [laugh]
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yes sorry about that.  They were paying out loads of money at first, is that right?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Well it got high because they sort of suddenly realised that oh my God there\rquote s this number of cattle and this number of sheep gone, they are going to be expensive to buy back in again.  Um, and then somebody went, \'93
oh my God they are paying whatever for this cow here we\rquote ll have to have a bit of a cap on this\'94.  So they had a guideline.  I think that the guideline was quite a long way through but it was up to the farmers whether they used it or not, sort
 of thing, but you could appeal for individual animals on specific you know, if it was a cow that was used for breeding.  I mean, there was one that went for 20 odd grand but she had had something like six heifer cows that each sold for 10 grand each, so 
she\rquote d actually been worth more than he was paid for her, if you see what I mean.  And bulls have been used by AI Centres and things like that generally, a huge amount of income you know that if the top of the breed if they\rquote 
re in that top bracket.  But um some of the others I think they were lucky to get what they got.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Yeah, it doesn\rquote t seem to be very consistent .
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Oh it depends on which valuer you got.  Cause they had to know your stock and they had to know the market you know, because I would just go and say \'93oh yes its Swaledale\'94
.  Well I mean a Swaledale ewe could be worth 20 quid or it could be work like 250 it depends on its breeding because that\rquote s what\rquote s important.  In a pure bred one to somebody, against commercial sheep its just the shape of them that\rquote 
s important, cross breeds you see, your not gonna breed the other one to breed from its an end product really.  So you know you\rquote 
ve a limit to the value then.  But a pedigree animal, it just depends what somebody would pay for or its off-spring or semen from it or whatever.
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 
\par }{\insrsid23704 The people that got good prices round here, I mean there are a lot of fairly commercial dairy and they would be getting you know \'a31500, \'a31600, maybe \'a32,000 a cow.  Um, and afterwards they are going out and they are wanting to pay 
\'a3800 for a cow to buy them back in [laugh].  Well then the people that have been stuck with the stock all year are feeling hard-done.  Because they\rquote re thinking, well at least they\rquote 
ll get a bit of the share of this good fortune or ill fortune or whatever so they want to get a reasonable price, and everybody will be better off.  Most people just wanting to spend what it would have cost them before Foot & Mouth broke out, I think that
\rquote s sensible because you don\rquote t want to have \'a31600 in a dairy cow if your only g
etting 16 pence a litre for the milk, its never gonna pay for itself and its feed you know.  But when people start talking about prices then the ones that are left with the stock are thinking that they\rquote ve been left, they\rquote 
ve missed out.  So yes there will be resentment that way but not always.  Our village is fine everybody\rquote s getting on grand, the ones that are left and the ones that are restocking.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 Well I guess the value of some animals goes beyond the actual intrinsic value of the animals\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 Of course it does, its almost like the biggest diner in the world.  If somebody can afford it and they want it they will pay for it.  It\rquote s not just on what its going to produce in its lifetime, it\rquote 
s almost the status of owning it really.  You know, a show animal and you can trawl it round the shows, you know its much more than just the animal.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 I\rquote m conscious I\rquote ve taken up more time \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid23704 No your all right, no your all right, I\rquote ve got you down till half past one so your all right until half past two I mean.  So yeah no.  You\rquote 
ll be absolutely fed up with hearing everybody winging on about their individual stories.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid23704 No not at all, it\rquote s fascinating 
\par 
\par }}