{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li720\ri1008\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin1008\lin720\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{
\s18\ql \li720\ri1008\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin1008\lin720\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Block Text;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2188258\rsid4291729\rsid12458877\rsid13193575}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr12\min53}{\printim\yr2002\mo1\dy10\hr15\min14}
{\version3}{\edmins1}{\nofpages24}{\nofwords6956}{\nofchars39655}{\nofcharsws46518}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl2552\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot4291729 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs20\insrsid13193575 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid4291729 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid13193575 
\par Interview ID:  PM52}{\insrsid13193575 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs19\insrsid13193575 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid12458877 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs19\insrsid13193575 
\par }\pard \s17\qr \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid13193575 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 1}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 8}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}08/01/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\ul\insrsid13193575 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid13193575 Date of birth: 1969
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid13193575 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Occupation: Group 1}{\cs21\super\insrsid13193575 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs21\fs20\super\insrsid13193575 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid13193575  }{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 Group 1 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 
Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 Group 2 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 Group 3 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 Group 5 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid13193575 Group 6 }{\fs20\insrsid13193575 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f37\insrsid13193575 
\par }}}{\insrsid13193575 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}
North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13193575 Can I just start by asking you if you think the Foot and Mouth Crisis (FMC) has affected your health and your families health in any way?
\par }{\insrsid13193575 
\par Em, our health not that much, there was a very worrying time during March when it first was confirmed, you see, Cumbria\rquote s case number 2 was confirmed next door on the 1}{\super\insrsid13193575 st}{\insrsid13193575 
 March, and we knew then that, you know, we were one of the first farms to have a D order slapped on us, em, so we made the decision not to go out. We more or less\'85the kids weren\rquote t at school, no cars were out, our cars weren\rquote 
t even started for 10 weeks, and we just lived out of the freezer and had groceries delivered by an Auntie you see. The first day it was confirmed next door, it was a very worrying time like, it really was. I never slept the first nig
ht, and then the second night wasn\rquote 
t a lot better, but then the third night they were on the phone, and he had it among his sheep, and it never got from his sheep to his cows on the other side of the yard. After that we felt a lot better and we thought tha
t we might not get it, you know, if it hasn\rquote t moved from one side of the yard to the other, em, we did stand a chance.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid13193575 What was going through your head in those early days?
\par }{\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, the thing was we didn\rquote t know, you see we\rquote re on a rented farm here, and our income is our cows, so if they came and took out cows we\rquote d have no income, but we didn\rquote 
t know them first two days actually what the Ministry were paying for your cows, and we didn\rquote t even know that they paid to have your farm all cleared up, and they paid you \'a315.00 an hour to clear your farm up, we didn\rquote 
t know any of that. We didn\rquote t know anything of the sort, didn\rquote t know that until about a fortnight after, and the values that they we giving you, we actually the values that your stock was worth and probably 
a bit more. But the first 2 days we just thought, as in the BSE crisis, when they took the cows off you they were giving you about half what they were worth, we thought that if that happened to us there\rquote 
s a chance we would loose our farm, our home and everything like, because we couldn\rquote t pay our rent, and we have borrowed money like. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 It must have been very worrying
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par It was for the first 2 days, and then, you know, well the Ministry do pay you for your cows at market value, well you knew that you\rquote d be able to pay your borrowed money off, and the Landlord understood that you had no income, so it wasn\rquote 
t going to be as big a disaster as maybe first thought. All we could do was sit and wait after that. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What was that like?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, we were up here, we were a mil
e off the road, there was nobody bothering us, nobody came up to see us, it was alright, you know, it was no different, kids were off school, the weather was good, it was dry and sunny nearly every day, and it was no different. We were just sort of hangin
g on, watching the news and who was getting it. At first everyone was traceable to Longtown Auction you see, and then after that, they started, 1 or 2, weren\rquote 
t traceable to Longtown Auction and erm, you know, it was just going to be one after the other, and it was. From the 12}{\super\insrsid13193575 th}{\insrsid13193575  to the 25}{\super\insrsid13193575 th}{\insrsid13193575 
 of March, they were just going down round us like 9 pins like. You know, it moved on to the next door farm, next door and next door, by the 25}{\super\insrsid13193575 th}{\insrsid13193575 
 March we were the only one left, all our neighbours had gone, and we wondered why we hadn\rquote 
t got it. This stopping up at home, you know, and keeping away from everybody else seemed to be working. Everyone we knew that was going with it had all been out, they\rquote d either been out for the shopping, they\rquote 
d had workmen in and out with their own cars, so we put it all down to this, so we never dared move after that, we didn\rquote t dare go out because everyone that did go out was getting foot and mouth. You know, you just didn\rquote 
t know, it was the not knowing that was the hardest bit, how it was moving.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
So you must have been living day to day with the fear that\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well we were really, we were sure that we were going to get it because everyone else got it, erm, you know, we really still can\rquote t understand why we were left. You see we have another farm where me brother farms at, and he was exactly the same, he
\rquote d saw all his neighbours as well and then he was the only one left where he lives. We were just on the phone constantly every morning, thinking either he\rquote d got it or we\rquote 
d got it, and every time the phone went it was somebody else had got it, but it was whether it was one of our places. We used to go back and forwards each day between each farm but that had to stop, and we g
ot a lad who moved in with them and lived with them and they were doing just the same as we were, just sitting tight, just letting it blow over like. We kept going on and another day came and another day came and then it sort of quietened around here a bi
t, and it was working hard, there weren\rquote 
t many cases around here, and er, this was going on into April by then, but there was a lot more case up by Carlisle and out Silloth way and Wigton, so we began to wonder if it had past, and then there was a few, it s
tarted up again and started coming down towards the end of April beginning of May, and cleaning 1 or 2 up that it had forgotten the first time. And em, it swept us past again, at both places, and er, like we thought well, you know, as we got towards June,
 it started to quieten even more around here, and I think it was the 15}{\super\insrsid13193575 th}{\insrsid13193575 
 of May was one of the first times I went out on the road, but you were frightened to near anybody. It was a red hot day I remember, and I was in the NFU offices getting some paperwork
 filled in, and it was some paperwork that had to be filled in, it was essential like, and I was sitting in the NFU office, and it was absolutely red hot, in all me waterproofs, sweating like I dunno what (laughs) and er\'85
you know, folk must have wondered what the heck I was on with really like. But you know it was \lquote cause it was the first time we\rquote d been out, and what we\rquote d done up to then seemed to have saved us, so we didn\rquote 
t dare change it. Then by the time the end of May came there was some big decisions, there was some big decisions that had to be made\'85
when the cows were in the buildings and we had to let them out you see, it was very worrying then, do we let them out, do we keep them in, we were out of silage and the weather was hot, so we just had to go a
head and let them out, and we did and then it past again. That was another hurdle we\rquote d got over, and then it was after we\rquote 
d let them out, it was moving onto silage time, and when we silage we usually have a big gang of people from all over that comes in to help us, and er, and we share\'85and this year we couldn\rquote 
t do it. That was another big worrying time, I dunno how we got round it, so you know, we made arrangements and em, the contractor that does our silaging, his machinery had never been out you see, so we thought we he can\rquote 
t have picked anything up. By this time we had the pressure washer up and anything that came in we just pressure washed it, so we pressure washed it from top to bottom, including the driver, we made our silage and got 1 or 2 people in, 
but our next door neighbour, he usually comes to help us, but he\rquote d gone down with foot and mouth, but by this time it had been 3 months from when he\rquote d gone down with foot and mouth, and we said we need help, we can\rquote 
t just manage now, but he wouldn\rquote t come, and he said that he didn\rquote t want to be responsible for bringing it, and so, we got someone else to come and we did get round it. We made the silage and then a fortnight went by, and er, we still hadn
\rquote t got it. Each job we did and we didn\rquote t get it, we began to feel more confident, it took all summer to get all your confidence back in what you actually did, and even up to September I\rquote 
d never actually been anywhere apart from into town to pick odd bits and pieces up. Then there was one Sunday, in September, there was a ploughing match we\rquote d went to and I thought God this is the first time I\rquote d seen farmers, there\rquote 
d be no shows nothing to go to, no meetings, nothing and er, I went to this ploughing match and it just really hit hard, again to see how many fires there\rquote d been like, \lquote cause we\rquote d missed all that, and the farms closest to us didn
\rquote t have fires \lquote cause they were near the motorway, so all their cattle, so we never saw any of these fires, we were spared all that, it weren\rquote t till September that we\rquote d realised how
 bad it had been, when there were all these fires just sitting on the roadside and in villages and this sort of thing. The one up there was only about a hundred yards off the school playground. We came out as if we were coming out after a bombing raid, an
d you were just seeing what had been bombed, you know, it was like, and this was way into September like, it was\'85you know by then we were starting to get used to everything, it was like normality. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Do you think the fires had any affect on peoples\rquote  health?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well they must have done I would think, but you see we never saw one actually, we just saw the remains of them, it was July before I saw me first pyre in real life, all that we\rquote 
d seen had been on the telly, now there was a day in about, maybe the end of M
arch, which really hit hard. We got to the point when we really had to do something because farming had to carry on, even if we did get foot and mouth, because we had grain crops and the grain crops needed to be like, fertiliser to be put on, and the land
 we have nearest the neighbours with foot and mouth, was all grain crops, so I went down with the tractor into these fields, and er I got once round this field and I just saw next doors sheep all lying dead by then, they hadn\rquote 
t been taken away, and er, I just got one round this field and that was it like, once you\rquote 
d seen it all, you felt very guilty like, because we were carrying on and everyone else had gone, and I just packed in and came home. That was it, that was me first experience of seeing something that was dead and it was real like, it wasn\rquote 
t just on telly.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 It must have been quite a shock
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par It was a bit, but there was a bigger feeling of guilt, because everyone had gone, and we were the only ones left, it had felt like there was a pot full of luck, and it hadn\rquote t been shared out, we\rquote 
d just gone with the lot, and we felt greedy in a way, that w
as a hard hitting day like. Went back the next day and it felt alright like, but just for a few moments when you saw them dead sheep and all this field with half eaten turnips and troughs with feed, and gates all lifted off with hinges, it were like every
thing had just been abandoned and shot dead there and then. That was a hard hitting day, but the next day I went back and carried on, but just for a few moments you felt very guilty. As time went on we got more used to it, although things hadn\rquote 
t eased, ther
e were still getting to be as many cases, and some of the cases were getting closer again, but we were carrying on, we were used to it, we were in the frame of mind that it if it got us it got us, because we did feel as if we were the only ones that was l
eft, we were odd that we were left, we were just going to be like everyone else towards the end of it. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Did you feel resigned to the fact that you were going to get it at some point?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well we did, and we were resigned to the fact that there wasn\rquote t much that we could do about it, because we saw some farmers that had been out and had knocked about and had done very little in the way of biosecurity, they\rquote 
d done nothing they were dirty farms, and hadn\rquote t got it, so what we were doing maybe, although at the time we didn\rquote t know any different, so we just got used to it, and we were either going to get it or it wasn\rquote 
t, because it came back in August and had a second go at us, it came to next door but one in August like, and er, but then it was if it gets us it gets us, and it\rquote ll just make us like everybody else.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Did you feel like you were different to everybody else?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah, we did for a long time, but not different as in a bad way, different in that we\rquote d gone with all the luck, you know, guilty, we almost felt guilty
, because whenever you went anywhere and talked to a group of farmers, you could guarantee that 3 quarters of the people that were standing next to you were foot and mouth victims, were ever you went or whoever you talked to was a one, and we were the odd
 ones who weren\rquote t. It was different to find someone that hadn\rquote t got foot and mouth.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
What about the information that was coming out about culling procedures, payments etc.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well there wasn\rquote t much that came through, you know the Ministry sent, there was quit
e a lot of correspondence from the Ministry, but you just read the first page and thought this was written by a fella in an office and got sick of it, and some of them you just didn\rquote t bother opening, \lquote 
cause it would just be the same as the last \lquote un. You kn
ow, we were following the cases on the internet and you could see that it was moving like, I would say it was moving similar to them pyres moving in Australia at the minute, you know the wind just blows it, and if it gets you it gets you and for some reas
on it doesn\rquote t get others.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What about the coverage on the TV and radio
\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well I thought that it was very good, \lquote cause for once they were on farmers side, unlike the BSE crisis, when the exporting of livestock, you know they were very anti-farming, you know 
that really got a lot of farmers backs up, but when the foot and mouth was on there was quite a lot of sympathy like, a lot of sympathy, and you know we had helicopters up over here like, you know, regularly, and you\rquote 
d presume they were journalist helicopters, they were just sort of touring round and then you were in at night watching it all on telly like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Do you think all the media was sympathetic?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Mostly, there were a couple of things that annoyed us like, there was so much on telly that you didn\rquote t get to catch it all, you\rquote 
d have liked to catch it all, but they seemed to have tracked down the right people, and the right people were saying the right things at exactly the right times like. A few names spring to mind, well last week, when was it last week? 
Between Xmas and New Year, Radio 4\rquote 
s farming today was sort of doing a summing up of the foot and mouth over the year, and they really did a good job, they talked to the right people and they just picked up, it had only been a few lines each, and they real
ly summed the job up well like, the media had got on our side like, which was a help.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Was it?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Oh enormously like, as I say, with the BSE crisis, and then the exporting of calves like, there was a lot of anti-farming, and that annoyed a lot of people, a lot of people.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Did you listen to Radio Cumbria?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah a lot, still do actually.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What was their coverage like?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Oh very good, because you know that the presenters and that they were all very much involved you see, there were producers who were a local vets son, and the presenters all lived in villages and all these villages all had fires (pyres), the
y knew what was going on.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Do you think that in some ways the FMC has helped to bring the community together?
\par 
\par }{\b0\insrsid13193575 I think that it has in a lot of ways. You know, everybody at the start was tryin\rquote  to do something to help, \lquote cause there was so much of the unknow
n at the start, there was meetings cancelled left, right and centre that was nothing to do with farming, and you just felt that er, tryin\rquote  to restrict the movement of people to stop spreading it, but I don\rquote 
t think it was the movement of people, it just seems to be an air movement thing. You know looking back, all these meetings that was cancelled, I don\rquote t think it would have made much difference really.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
So how do you think the community has changed?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, I don\rquote t know, there was a lot of sympathy but then there was a little bit less when the story came out about the 43 millionaires, and I think some of that was justified, enormous valuations, we know what we would have got \lquote 
cause we got ours valued, valued over the telephone \lquote cause we thought we would be n
ext, we wanted to know where we stood and how we would come out of it. Every single farmer in the country has an annual valuation for tax purposes, so you know what you\rquote re worth anyway, so there\rquote 
s the annual tax valuation and your foot and mouth valuation, and they didn\rquote t tally, and they didn\rquote t just not tally by a few thousand pounds, they didn\rquote t tally by a few hundred thousand pounds. There\rquote s nobody admitting to that.

\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 So the foot and mouth valuation was higher?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Oh aye, unbelievable. You know from what ours was worth, we have a very good pedigree herd, I know you see, without blowing our own trumpet too much, they\rquote 
re excellent. We won last years herd competition as the best herd in the county and that doesn\rquote t include North Cumbria, it covers part of South 
West Scotland, part of Durham, part of Northumberland and part of North Lancashire, and we won the large herd section. It doesn\rquote t mean to say we\rquote ve the best herd in the team \lquote cause there\rquote 
s 3, small, medium and large, and the ones that won the previous year were excluded from entrance, so it doesn\rquote t mean that we had the best herd but we had the best herd last year, so we didn\rquote t want to loose it like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Would you have stood to gain financially if you had lost your herd?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Oh without any doubt, but it wasn\rquote t a money thing like, the grief doesn\rquote t outweigh the money like, you know when I see other peoples grief and what they\rquote ve lost, there\rquote 
s no doubt like, we would have paid off all our borrowed money off and from what they seem to have been paying for the cows, up till now, probably have change in the pocket.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
What would you have done if you had been culled, would you have restocked?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah we would have done, we would have been in a good position to move forward to be honest with you, we would have paid borrowed money off and bought cows back, maybe they wouldn\rquote t have been as good as what we\rquote 
ve got, but em, I think we would have been on a good footing to move forward. We would have less worries, you know, \lquote cause the Ministry paid to have all your building work cleaned up and everything. I\rquote m still pleased, I wouldn\rquote 
t swap it for anything, I\rquote m still pleased we didn\rquote t get it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Those first f
ew weeks when you were staying on the farm all the time, what was that time like?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it wasn\rquote t as bad as you thought, we felt sheltered up here, we felt safe, as time went on, particularly as everybody else went and we were still left, cause they all we
nt within a few days of each other you see, and then we felt safer up here, we\rquote re as mile from the road, we\rquote 
re away from everybody and nobody bothered us, and we were up here and just living out of the freezer. We were warm and comfortable, we felt that if we went out, we didn\rquote t no what we were going to find.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
That must have been strange, wondering about what was happening outside?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it was really, because we daren\rquote t go have a look, in case we picked something up and fetched it back, and we didn\rquote t want to be the ones to bring it back, or be accused of bringing it back. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What was it like for the kids?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well they weren\rquote t that bothered, M is not really a school er, I mean he\rquote s all right, he can read and write and everything, he\rquote s only 6, it was just extend
ed time off, he was off school and he runs around outside like he did before he went to school and knocks about on the farm. He wasn\rquote t bothered and he was good company for me. He didn\rquote t understand the impact of it like you know, it didn
\rquote t bother him really. We watched it on telly and that and I explained it to him a few times that\rquote s what we\rquote 
ll get foot and mouth. There was a period when we had a really poorly cow, nowt to do with foot and mouth, it was just, it had calved badly and got some type of infectio
n and it was quiet sick. It was lying down in the field, we were doing what we could for it and it was under veterinary treatment, and we could see that it was getting worse and it died, and er, I said to M, you coming with us to bury it, I had to bury it
, it couldn\rquote t leave the farm obviously, and we didn\rquote t want anyone to come for it, so we would have to bury it with the JCB. I said to M I\rquote 
m going to bury that cow now, he said can I come, I says do you want to, it's not a very good job, \lquote no I want to come\rquote , so I says come with us then. So I went and picked the cow up in the front bucket on the loader and erm, I says we\rquote 
re going to take it up to where there\rquote s a stubble field, and we\rquote ll bury the stubble field. He says shall I get in the bucket with the cow? So it obviously, it didn\rquote 
t bother him like, he was going sit in the sit bucket on the loader with a dead cow like, so the thing was lying flat out, legs in the air and tongue hanging out like you see them on the telly, so that was supportive, to know that if
 we did get foot and mouth it wasn\rquote t ganna affect him that much like. But I mean for a 6 year old like, he took it in his stride like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 How old is your other child?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par She\rquote s just 3, E is 3, she\rquote s just a girl like. She was too small to understand like. I think it might have been different if you had kids of about 12 or 14, they knew what was going on like, but he was just 5, he\rquote 
s 6 now, it was alright.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Does your wife work?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah, she did but the work was out of action because she worked in the auction mart, e
m, but it was in the part, they have a furniture department where they have a sale once a week, and it was closed down, the auction was closed down, so her work was out of action anways. But even if for some reason she wouldn\rquote 
t have been allowed to go, I wouldn\rquote t have let her out like. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 It must have been quite a hard time for her.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, yes and no, you see it was like all her family were up in the Carlisle, Longtown area, and er, it was just the same for them. As a family, all her uncles, \lquote 
nen of them got foot and mouth, all our aunties and uncles, they never got foot and mouth, and they were in equally infected areas as we were, and why our families never came out with, all of us, didn\rquote t get it, I don\rquote 
t know. You know, just over Xmas there we had a party, her Dad has a farm, her Dad\rquote s three brothers have a farm, her uncles, and they\rquote re in a similar location, and they didn\rquote 
t get foot and mouth, although there was as much with them as there was with us, so the family party was the first meeting we had when nobody had foot and mouth. Just over Xmas like, it was remarkable really.
\par So we could have a good conversation without offending anybody, I put all that in the diary like when you read it. \lquote Cause there wasn\rquote t a foot and mouth victim sitting next to us, and we were just, you know, in some ways makin\rquote 
 fun of them, \lquote oh look out here\rquote s a foot and mouth victim coming, he\rquote s got a new Range Rover\rquote , or this sort of thing like, and we could say that without actually offending anybody. That was the firs
t time, just over Xmas. They we\rquote re all planning on going on a curling trip, there was a group of farmers going, and we\rquote re saying, \lquote oh we\rquote ll get such and such to come, he\rquote s got a new Range Rover and he\rquote 
s got no work to do, and we\rquote ll all go on this trip and he can drive, \lquote cause he\rquote s had more time off than me, \lquote cause he\rquote s a victim.\rquote  You wouldn\rquote t have been able to say that if there\rquote 
d been somebody next to you with out feeling you were offending somebody. But that was the first occasion we were all together, the
y were all from all parts of North Cumbria, Cockermouth, Brampton, Longtown, Penrith and there was one of her cousins from Edinburgh, they hadn\rquote t had it either. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
How did you manage financially during the FMC?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, we had a milk check you see, so I mean, you know, with not going out, we saved a lot of money (laughs), \lquote 
cause we were living out of the freezer, and there was nothing getting spent really, the few groceries that we had delivered were just bread, we had milk, we had potatoes on the farm, there 
was meat in the freezer, we just needed a few vegetables really and a daily newspaper. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
So you still had income coming in from the farm?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Sort of yeah, it was a bit erratic, but it was a bit erratic anyways and it\rquote s still erratic now, so there was no change there really (laughs). The milk tanker came everyday and took our milk, so\'85.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Even during the\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah, we had a milk check, and as the summer went on the milk check was quite a better price, best price it\rquote s been for a few years, but it\rquote s stopping away now.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Have you noticed any changes in your heath since the start of FMC?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Not really, I\rquote ve got a sore arm, and it\rquote s just dawned on us what it is, it is kind of indirectly related to foot and mouth, we\rquote ve got a computer and I spend an hour on it every night and I\rquote 
m beginning to get repetitive strain injury (laughs), I\rquote ve heard people on about that, and I thought it must be something for useless folk, but apparently it isn\rquote t, and it\rquote 
s when I go on the computer and clicking the mouse, and it started down here and it\rquote s working up to me shoulder, and it\rquote s quite painful, so apart from that (laughs)\'85
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What about your wife and kids?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par No nothing really, in fact, they were more healthy, because ever since they\rquote ve started school and nursery we just never seem to be able to shake a cold or they\rquote 
ve always got runny noses and bad colds, and then 10 or 15 weeks they were off school, there was no colds, so (laughs)\'85no nothing really, we felt up here we were safe, there was nobody to bother us like. But it\rquote s just the way the fa
rm lies, I wouldn\rquote t say that would be the same for everybody. You know, those immediately by roadside or just 20 or 30 yards off the next door neighbour farm, that would be a different story, but it\rquote s just how the lie of the land is.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What about the effects you\rquote 
ve seen on other people?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, not that much more, those that had foot and mouth we didn\rquote t see them, they wouldn\rquote t come near us for a long time after they got it. You know I was in Penrith picking up some spare parts from one of the suppliers, and e
m, there was a fella that we knew very well and he said I\rquote ll not come near you \lquote cause I\rquote ve had foot and mouth, and we\rquote re still on washing out, and he wouldn\rquote 
t come anywhere near us like. It was just you know, that sort of thing, cause by then we were in a minority cause we\rquote d survived like, and everybody knew who\rquote d survived and who hadn\rquote t. So we didn\rquote 
t really see anybody, we just talked to them over the phone, and you know, they were all devastated when they first got it, but then it was the to get on, they 
knew they had to get on, and they were getting paid to do it, and in fact when they were getting paid \'a315.00 per hour it was probably \'a3
14.00 an hour more than when they were farming normally (laughs), so they just got on with it and they knew that it had to be done. We didn\rquote t go near these farms, we were frightened to death to go near an infected premises, so we didn\rquote 
t really see a lot of what went on apart from who we talked to over the phone and who we saw getting interviewed on the telly. We must have se
en more of our neighbours and relations interviewed on the telly in the first few weeks of March and April that we\rquote d ever seen like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 It must have been strange
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it was like, but it was helpful in a way because we saw them and 
the film crews were just going round, and you could see who they were interviewing, just someone who was working on a field by the roadside or the farm was on the roadside and they were just travelling round until they found somebody and give them an inte
rview. There wasn\rquote t many of our neighbours that wasn\rquote t interviewed.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Were you interviewed?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par No, our Father nearly was, it was getting on to the time of vaccination, this was towards the end of April, and there was a big hot debate about vaccination, and the
y kept ringing up, and they wanted to do it live because it always looks better live, and twice they came, and the first time they said they\rquote re not ganna do it now \lquote cause there\rquote 
s another story cropped up, because foot and mouth was starting to, they were wanting, people had done what they could do being the end of April and after that they were looking for a new story, although there wasn\rquote 
t any. After that they came down to the bottom of the road and Father went down to meet them, they got a phone call, it was to do with GMTV, that\rquote 
s what it was, said there was another story, so they went. A week later they rang back and they were going to do it again, or 3 days later, and same thing happened again, I think there was an oil refinery blew up in Skegness, ther
e was a couple of people killed, so they had to race to Skegness, somewhere north Lincolnshire, so he never got on telly like. He was interviewed over the telephone on the radio a couple of times like. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 How do you think the FMC has changed the farming community?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it\rquote s changed it, there\rquote s no doubt, I don\rquote t know for the better or for the worse or what I can\rquote t really say.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Do you think people feel more positive now?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par I don\rquote t know really. Everybody said we\rquote re going to change, we\rquote re not going to go back to the way we were, well, I think everybody is ganna go back to the way we were, there\rquote s no doubt, \lquote cause we\rquote 
re farmers like, farmers suddenly can\rquote t become summit else over night like, they never have been able to and they never will be able to. You\rquote re either a farmer or you\rquote re not, there\rquote 
s nee middle spot. Those that were taken out and going back in, maybe in a slightly different way, but some of thems getting bigger and some of thems getting smaller and going into a specialist type of thing.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 There was a lot of talk about diversification\'85.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah well next doors done that you see, em, he\rquote s given his land up and he\rquote s a lump of rented land and he owns his own building, and he\rquote s moving into free range egg production and he\rquote s converting one of his cattle building
s into a like a hen house, but it\rquote s better than a hen house, sort of automated feeding, automated egg collection, but the hens just run out into his field. So in a way, it\rquote 
s given us an opportunity because his lands become available and you know, it might be put onto our farm like, this sort of thing. I think there could be land, you know, we\rquote ve all been chasing ourselves tryin\rquote 
 to compete for rented land and paying a fortune in rent for it, and it hasn\rquote t done any of us any good, so maybe now it\rquote s ganna be more supply and next to no demand, and it might help us short term like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What do you think about the future?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, it\rquote s not good really, but everybody has to adapt, you know, it doesn\rquote t look like there\rquote s ganna be any great price increases, there just see
ms to be too much of everything, and if we supposed to be competing on the world market, the only way we can compete on the world market is for things to get bigger and reduce your fixed costs. It\rquote s sad in a way, it\rquote 
s like corner shops, all the corner shops are shut and it\rquote s ganna be just a few supermarkets, well it\rquote s ganna be like all the corner farms are shut are there's just a few superfarms. It\rquote s change, and nobody\rquote 
s very happy about it, but I mean, there seems to be very little you can do.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What about 
the local production schemes, like the one in the Eden Valley?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah, but there\rquote s too many of these specialist schemes now, Freedom Foods, and Fell Bred and this Lakeland Beef, this sort of thing, you know it\rquote s just confusing folk, there\rquote 
s too many of them. There might be an odd 1 or 2 that hit it off and make a go of it, but I\rquote m just not sure whether it\rquote ll be everyone\rquote s cup of tea. I think you\rquote re ganna be in that sort of a scheme when you\rquote 
re a specialist thing for some people wanting something just a little bit better or you\rquote re just got to get onto large scale low cost. You\rquote ve got to decide which boat you\rquote re ganna to be on.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
So from where you are now, do you feel more or less positive about the future than you did before the FMC?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par In some ways less and some ways more positive. Less in the way that you\rquote re ganna get less for your milk and you\rquote ve got to think harder how we can survive if we\rquote re ganna carry on. So, you know, we\rquote 
ve got to have a go at getting bigger somehow, and some of these farms where, they\rquote ve left, if we were to take them on or to go small and specialist, I dunno.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What do you think?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, time will tell, we\rquote ve made enquires, there\rquote s a farm I know\rquote s empty at the minute, it\rquote s had foot and mouth and they don\rquote t know what they\rquote re ganna do with it, I said do you fancy letting it and we\rquote 
ll have a go at running it, and they said we don\rquote t know, we\rquote ll have to have a meeting, we\rquote re still waiting. They were ganna let us know before Xmas. They\rquote ve got a team of consultants in, they\rquote ll be p
aying someone a 100 quid an hour, and it makes you think well, get on with it, but it\rquote s how things work these days. Everything has to be politically correct and everything has to be evaluated and all that sort of stuff, it just doesn\rquote 
t work in agriculture that like, agriculture works by the weather outside, you make hay while the sun shines and this sort of thing, you haven\rquote t got to have a consultants report to decide when you make hay, but that\rquote 
s how these things work, so time will tell.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 So you said that 
in some ways you felt less positive about the future?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, the price of milks coming down, they said that there was far too much of it when prices was really low back in \lquote 98, \rquote 99, there\rquote s too much, you know, supply and demand, you\rquote ve just have to take less, that\rquote 
s all we can do for you. Now they\rquote ve reduced production by I don\rquote t know how many percent, it\rquote s about 90% in Cumbria but nationally I think it\rquote s only 5%, the prices haven\rquote t gone up a bit, they\rquote 
ve taken 10% of the sheep out the country but the price of lambs not very dear like. They\rquote ve got to make profits for their shareholders and farmers don\rquote t seem to be strong like. The Government seems to be on the consumers side like, they
\rquote ve got Lord Sainsbury donating to the Labour party, we\rquote re not powerful enough, we\rquote re only 2% of the electorate so we don\rquote t really count. There\rquote s a lot of farmers getting closed down, getting forced to close down, it
\rquote s very sad.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Do you think farmers are becoming increasingly demoralised by all the recent \lquote disasters\rquote  in farming?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par I would say some of them maybe are, but, you know, that isn\rquote t the root of it, it\rquote s that we\rquote re not getting a fair price for what we sell our produce. Milk leaves here at 18p and you pay what, about 45p? All we wants 22p, we\rquote 
re not wanting 40p out of the 45p, we\rquote re just wanting 22p, and we\rquote d be able to make a go of it, but no, supply and demand lads, sorry.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
What lessons do you think need to be learnt?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it was just a natural thing, it was just how it got in the first spot, how it set off, and is there any truth in the rumours behind the hidden agenda thing, they just wanted shot of farmers anyway. There\rquote 
s been serious serious amounts of rumours going about and a lot of thems have been fabricated like, started and added to as time goes on, but the one ab
out looking for timber in January, that one was right, and that absolutely stinks like, you know, that came up in the House of Commons that question and they said it was just routine, you know, how can it be routine from \rquote 67 till 2001, if it was 
\rquote 67, \rquote 77, \rquote 87 and \rquote 
97, every ten years or so, you would have believed it, but not 1967 to 2001, just routine, not a chance like. Apart from that rumour I just take them all with a pinch of salt like, because so many of them haven\rquote t been true.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 How do you think DEFRA
 handled the crisis, were they sensitive enough to the situation of farmers?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well they probably did, but they\rquote re wrapped up with the political correctness, time and motion and written work and all this that and the other. The main man at Carlisle, our local vet said that he\rquote 
d probably get an MBE out of all of this, there\rquote s going to be no livestock left in North Cumbria, but you can guarantee every single piece of paper, every single i will be dotted and every t will be crossed, and it\rquote ll all be in the righ
t colour ink. Never mind that there\rquote s no livestock left in North Cumbria (laughs), that part of the job\rquote ll be right, and the system just doesn\rquote t work like that, it boils down to the fact that you\rquote 
ve got to make hay when the sun shines, you\rquote ve just got to move with lie of the land, never mind the paper work. All the local vets said really early on, the only way we\rquote 
d beat it, we had to set our emotions aside and just get on with it. The older vets who were round from the \lquote 60s, they just knew that was the only
 way to stop it. We had a vet here yesterday, he was saying that early on, and then he had his own farm with his own cattle and it got back to him, he was about case number 5 off the last case in September, and he says well he couldn\rquote 
t argue with it because he was the one that was saying early on you\rquote ve just got to get on and cull to stop it. 
\par }{\b\insrsid13193575 
\par Where did most support come from during the FMC?}{\insrsid13193575 
\par 
\par I\rquote m not sure really, there was very little anyone could do, just giving moral support\'85
\par }{\b\insrsid13193575 
\par Where did that come from? Was it from friends and family\'85}{\insrsid13193575 
\par 
\par Yeah, sort of, physically there was nothing you could do. I mean we were disinfecting and anybody that come onto the farm, a lot of them were frightened to come on because they didn\rquote t want to be, you know, we\rquote ll not come up, we\rquote 
ll not come up, \lquote we\rquote ve got a disinfectant thing set up now if your washing\rquote  and everybody was doing that, there was nobody that didn\rquote t try, and some was tryin\rquote 
 to do more than try, as time went on like. It was something that moved in the air, it seemed to start in one valley and just work up the valley and just clean everybody out, and took 90% of the valley out with it. The Ministry didn\rquote 
t even know how it was moving and who would be next like, when there was a case in the area, it just seemed to suck it up into the air and it hovered about in the still air and then it dropped just like a shower of rain. \lquote 
cause there are some farmers who have done nothing for biosecurity and haven\rquote t got it, and some that\rquote s done absolutely everything, and got it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
What do you think of the farms that had bad biosecurity?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well annoyed a bit, because it looks bad, especially when the story about these 43 millionaires comes out and then somebody wasn\rquote t tryin\rquote  and then you know, it just made people point their finger and say, you know, he was tryin\rquote 
 to get it because he\rquote ll be much better off with it, he\rquote s done nowt like, he deserves to get it. I sometimes wonder about them farmers that were tryin\rquote  to get it, I know they\rquote re a very very tiny minority, 
but you know, they should really be questioned whether they should come back into the industry I would say. You know, if they\rquote re just out to milk the tax payer. That\rquote s a very tiny minority, there wasn\rquote t many of them, wasn\rquote 
t many at all, 1 in a 1000 maybe.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What was the \lquote best\rquote 
 thing to come out of the FMC?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par I think the public might have a bit of understanding of how farming works a bit like, people got to know about sheep farming, that\rquote s just 1 example, there\rquote s a few more. You know, as things are now, 98% of the Joe Public aren\rquote 
t really interested like, and it\rquote s sad really, very sad. You would have a job to get them interested in agriculture like, because it affects everyone like. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
Do you think people have lost the link between production and buying\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Yeah, we don\rquote t need farmers, we just get our food from the supermarket\'85that\rquote s very sad like, they\rquote re not bothered at the end of the day like. That\rquote s how we\rquote ve lost our voice like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
So you think if anything good has come out of it, it\rquote s a\'85
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par A little bit understanding, but I think it seems to be fizzling out now, it\rquote s past now. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
What about the community, do you think there are positive things there?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, it could have done, it certainly did at the start, everybody was
 pulling together and there was a sense of emergency, and there was a spell there you could just about get away with owt, some of them wagons that were on the cull, they reckon they were all running about without tachographs in because there was a sense o
f emergency, and it was foot and mouth and you could just do that sort of thing, but that seems to have passed now, we seem to be getting back to normal now. There was a real sense of emergency like, it was out of control like. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 What do you think was the w
orst thing about the FMC?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par The waiting and the not knowing really. It was so difficult to make decisions, we had to make decisions for 6 months ahead, you know, crops you planted now were to feed, well some of them, 12 months ahead, and you just couldn\rquote t s
ee 12 hours ahead, and it was the worry if you\rquote d made the wrong decision, you know it\rquote s very easy to be wise after an event, very easy. We were tryin\rquote  to make forward budgets, well how the hell could you\'85you couldn\rquote 
t see 12 hours ahead like, if we\rquote d gone down with foot and mouth we\rquote d have telt the bank to go and (blows raspberry) \lquote cause we\rquote d have paid all the borrowed money off and you know, but if we was carrying on as normal, we\rquote 
d have to do a forward budget, \lquote cause we had bank loans and that to keep up with and we\rquote d kept up with them and this sort of thing.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Was the bank supportive?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well they were at first, they were tryin\rquote  to be, but you know at the end of the day they just want the money back, they wouldn't just look at the job and waver your loan, you
 can guarantee that, so. The landlord was quite supportive, the landlords were very supportive, although they\rquote 
re less supportive now than they were, you know, things are just getting back to where they were now. One landlord, we have a block of land of them, about 60 acres, and he says well, we said we\rquote 
re going to have difficulty using their land and he said, well we want you to still have it, but we\rquote d never get a licence to move cattle onto it and we didn\rquote t really want to move cattle onto it, so he said just do what you can with it, we
\rquote ll come to some arrangement and you can have it for a pound, and we usually pay about \'a32000 for it, so that was a help. Our own landlord that has this farm as well, they gave us 4 months half rent back to see us over the diff
icult period like, so you know, we\rquote ve had a few extra\'85some of this land that we\rquote ve had, we\rquote ve had very little use out of it you know, there\rquote s no sheep, we could have had the land grazed with sheep, it hasn\rquote 
t been utilised to its full potential, so the bits we\rquote ve had have offset the costs of disinfectant and bits and pieces we\rquote ve had to do extra, buy stuff, pressure washers to buy, you know, all sorts of things that we\rquote 
ve had to do, because our normal cattle were nearer home we\rquote ve had to do extra fencing to keep them in place, to make sure nothing got, we\rquote ve had quite a lot of extra expenses, but they might have got offset. There\rquote 
s been a bit less rent to pay and we\rquote ve got a bit more for the milk, so the year as a whole, you know, we might come out all right, in general it should balance itself out.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
How would you change how the FMC was managed?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well, DEFRA didn\rquote t know what they were doing, it would have been far better and it would have cost the country a lot less if they\rquote d had the auction companies and a few local farmers runnin\rquote 
 the whole thing from the start. The auction companies who are specialists, it\rquote s their job to handle livestock and to distribute it, and they now exactly\'85things need to be worked on a more local scale, you know, the people, tryin\rquote  to
 get an answer out of DEFRA Carlisle, \lquote oh we have to refer to Page Street in London\rquote  and this Page Street in London hadn\rquote t a bloody clue like, they just hadn\rquote t a clue like. The rules, they were just makin\rquote 
 up as they went a long like, and they\rquote d no idea li
ke. Every single farm was different, and the rules, you needed like a parish vet, who was in change of that parish, and he should have been in change of what went on in that parish, every movement, every livestock, every positive case, he should have been
 you know, someone who knew the parish, who knew where every field was, who knew the cattle in each field. He knew how much distance there was between farmer A and farmer B, he knew exactly\'85
the local vet, the parish vet would have been far better than tryin\rquote  to run it out of Page Street in London, they hadn\rquote t a bloody clue like. One farmer was tellin\rquote 
 us that he had foot and mouth, he knew he had it, everybody else had it and he got it, it was his worst fears confirmed when the Carlisle vet came out, oh you\rquote 
ve definitely got it. Well what do we do now? The Carlisle vet has got to ring Page Street to have it confirmed and give authorisation for the slaughter team to come on and everything else, so this Carlisle vet rang Page Street and said we\rquote 
ve got foot and mouth, and they said what\rquote s the symptoms, so he said about the feet and the sore mouth and he said they\rquote 
ve got temperatures between 105 - 107, and the civil servant said is that Centigrade or Fahrenheit, can you imagine a live cow running around with a temperature of 105 Centigrade? That wasn\rquote 
t the only one, there was loads more, that was the one that springs to mind like, it was Page Street that rang Farmers Weekly and asked them how often they were published, there was dozens more, someone wanted a licenc
e to sell wool, so they rang for a licence, they still had the sheep and they were in a relatively uninfected area, and they said you can sell wool but it hasn\rquote 
t to have been anywhere near any sheep. So where do they think bloody wool comes from like? Them really annoyed you at the time, you think them people are makin\rquote  decisions about tryin\rquote 
 to get on top of this disease, you just wondered how senior these people are. You know, tryin\rquote  to explaining to these people over the phone about wanting to move cattl
e from one field to another where all there was just a gate and a fence between, and they had to come to give an inspection and look, and they just seemed to be questioning you all the time. There was nobody left for us to infect like. They hadn\rquote 
t a clue like, but if there\rquote d been a parish vet, he\rquote d have known the lie of the land and the fields and the farms, there\rquote d have been a lot less grief like, he\rquote 
d have known like, that was where all the grief came from like, just tryin\rquote  to explain to folk over the phone what you were tryin\rquote  to do.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 Was that one of the worst things?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Well it was one of the bad things, it was one of the things that you remember that made you most annoyed, you were just tryin\rquote  to explain to someone over the phone and they didn\rquote t have much idea, and you could see that they didn\rquote 
t have much idea.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 I\rquote m conscious that I\rquote 
m taking up a lot of your time, is there anything that I haven\rquote t asked you that you think is important?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par Na, not really, I think I\rquote ve covered most things like.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 OK, thanks a lot for your time.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid13193575 
\par 
\par }}