{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid8728117\rsid12470915\rsid12934146\rsid14632696}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min44}{\printim\yr2004\mo2\dy4\hr16\min51}
{\version4}{\edmins4}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords6406}{\nofchars36516}{\nofcharsws42837}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2551\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot14632696 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12470915 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12470915 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12470915 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12470915 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid12470915 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid14632696 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid12470915 
\par Interview ID:  PM34
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs19\insrsid12470915 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid8728117 25}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs19\insrsid12470915 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid12470915 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12470915 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 15}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}15/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid12470915 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Date of birth: 1964
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 Occupation: Group 3}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid12470915 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid12470915 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid12470915  }{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Group 1 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid12470915 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid12470915 
When I set out to find A's quite isolated bungalow, it was a night without stars, pitch black and lonely.  I failed to spot landmarks and got lost!  I spoke with A's wife over the phone a couple of times but I could feel the panic rising.  When I eventual
l
y arrived, both A and his wife were standing on their drive looking anxiously towards me.  Their outside light flooded my path.  "You got here then", A remarked grinning.  I was led into a living room crammed with toy 'sit-on' dumper trucks and tractors. 
I
 was introduced to 20 month old S who  chatted away and happily lined up his toy vehicles for me to admire.  S was led away by his mother and A and  I settled ourselves.  A was clearly exhausted, "Aye left the house at 7 and not been long in (this was wel
l past 8pm), but that's the business."  I suggested that we could arrange another time but, "no you're all right, not after the trouble you've had finding us [laughing]."  I switched on the tape recorder.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par 
\par So where I usually start is by asking you to tell me a bit about yourself and your background?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I\rquote m an agricultural contractor by trade.  I\rquote m a farmer\rquote s son, my father use to have a dairy farm I think that was about [19]83 when he sold that.  I went to an agricultural college at Newton Rigg at Penrith.  I
 did a nine-month course there.    [INTERUPPTED BY YOUNG SON CRYING]  When I left there we bought another farm, but that was just a livestock farm, a sheep farm but that didn\rquote t last very long. There was a few financial problems shall we say, so he
\rquote s retire
d now and we started contracting.  [SON COMES INTO ROOM] When I came out of agricultural college I started as self employed, I worked round till 1993 then I started on the contracting side when I bought my first tractor and that was the year I got married
 as well.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
So your background is really dairy farming, you may not be old enough to remember the 67 outbreak?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par No, not quite, I was born in \lquote 64 but I was [PAUSE]   I can\rquote t really remember anything that happened in 67, I mean me Dad's told me because there w
ere farmers not too far away from us, we lived the other side of Carlisle at that time, at Kirkandrews on Eden there was a farm down there, that went down when we were kids, who had it and I can remember him talking about that but I can\rquote 
t remember it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Has your Dad talked about it since this outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 A little bit.  I don\rquote t think there was anything like the volume of restrictions we\rquote ve had this time.  There were movement restrictions at the time [EMPHASIS] but I didn\rquote t seem to last anything like as long as
 this time, obviously this is a bigger outbreak.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par Do you know why your Dad sold up in 83?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid12470915 I can\rquote 
t really remember, we sold the dairy farm that we had. We were out on a farm near Silloth for 18 months I think.  I was at College then we bought the one , that's where they live at now.  But like I say that didn\rquote 
t last very long, we never really got started properly there.  We sold most of the land off and kept the house and about 40 acres and the farm houses, so they still live there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So do you let the land?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 We just let the land out. There\rquote s just twenty to twenty two acres left now.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 And is that grazing land now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Oh yeh, it\rquote s marginal sort of land.  There are [EMPHASIS] dairy farmers round at Oakliegh Heath. Just on the Border there, there\rquote s a dairy farm.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So have you got brothers and sisters?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I\rquote ve one younger brother.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Is he in farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 He\rquote s in the contracting job with me as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 You set up together then?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No, well I started five or six years before him and then he decided he wanted to come into the sam
e job as well but we decided to keep our businesses separate but we work together, he works for me most of the time.  But he has his own tractors and machinery as well, but we try to buy machines that compliment each other so we can work together then. 

\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes because your working in the same areas, you don\rquote t want to be competing}{\f0\insrsid12470915 .  
\par 
\par Yes that\rquote s it really [LAUGHTER]  I do the slurry  handling side of it and he does the muck side of it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Does he live in the area?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par He still lives with my parents because he\rquote s not married, so that\rquote s where we\rquote re based from.  All our machinery and everything is up there. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Sorry, where is that again?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 It\rquote s about four miles further north.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Okay yes.  
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
We bought this property a year past May I think it was.  We bought off of  S's [WIFE'S] grandmother.  We have about three and a half acres of land  on the river bank here; the river is just at the bottom behind us, with the intention for me to build a she
d, a workshop in the yard here for my machines.
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So you\rquote re based here?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, but we\rquote re struggling for planning permission at the moment , had a bit of a fight with that, so it\rquote s been a bit of a problem but I think we\rquote re making progress now but it\rquote s taking a long time.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So can I ask what your first memory of the foot and mouth out break was?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Probably the reports on television of the outbreak in Devon and the link to the  farm on the North East.  My brother has a friend who is a farm manager over there and
 he was talking to him on the telephone and the lad that my brother went to college with over there, his farm was on the road up [EMPHASIS]  to the Heddon on the Wall farm.  They were saying there\rquote 
s all this traffic going up and down the road past their farm and they didn\rquote t know what was going on, it was when they were just investigating what had happened there [PAUSE]  because I know they were very worried because he\rquote 
d been in and out of the yard all the time with the tractors and all the vehicles were going past up to the Heddon on the Wall.  Then when they found out what it was he was terrified that he\rquote 
d taken it into his own farm.  He did eventually get foot and mouth but not at that point, it was more like a few weeks afterwards.  At that time, that\rquote s my first memories that I have.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Can you remember what you were thinking and feeling?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I was thinking I hope it stays over there and doesn\rquote t come over here, but within ten days or a fortnight it was in Longtown.  My first memory I have of it in this area was\'85
 I mean I know  Robbie X  quite well at S farm, which was the first one to get it. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 That\rquote s not too far from here is it? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No it\rquote s only about two and half, three miles at the most.  I went to school with Robbie X; he was just a year older than me. We we
re at a plant sale, like a machinery sale, everybody was talking about it there but it had been confirmed at S [PAUSE]  and that was the first one. That was my first memory of it.  My first thoughts were that\rquote 
s it, right in the area.   First thing I did was went straight to Longtown to the shop to get some disinfectant to wash the tractors and machines and everything.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So the disinfectant, was that because the Government directed it or was that because you knew that was what you had to do?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well people were starting to talk about it, everybody knew that disinfecting was the first thing to do, so everybody was saying it wasn\rquote 
t easy to get because nobody had really been holding it in stock.  It's not the sort of thing they sold a great deal of at that time.  We couldn\rquote t get any that day so we had to order some.  From that point we had about three weeks when we didn
\rquote t do anything, we didn\rquote t move [PAUSE]   we didn\rquote t want to.  Nobody wanted anybody on the farms at that point because it just snowballed round the area at that point.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So basically any kind of contract work had stopped?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes it did.  For about a good three weeks to a month we did nothing.  We weren\rquote t too worried about that because we knew at least by that there was no way we could be spreading it or
 accused of spreading it or anything like that. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But what about your income?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yeh well it did, it stopped things completely but we were fortunate it didn\rquote t [PAUSE],   because of the way the farming business works, you don\rquote 
t get paid straight away of f of farmers so we still had money coming in during those three weeks and by that point again I\rquote d started to earn again.  I think at that point A\rquote 
s at Longtown, they actually rang me and they were starting the live sheep cull.  
They were taking live sheep off the farm and taking them to the slaughterhouse at Carlisle and slaughtering them to try and help the spread of the disease.  So by that point, he was desperate for staff because the drivers of the lorries... because they we
re going back onto farms, they weren\rquote t allowed to let the lorries in the slaughterhouse, so they needed somebody to wash and disinfect all the lorries.  So I got a team of men together to work, in fact the first day I went myself because I couldn
\rquote t get enou
gh men, so that was earning me a suitable wage at the time, and then two or three days after that  the NFU contacted me and they wanted someone to go and help the army.  When the army were brought in they wanted somebody with local knowledge of the farms 
and the farmers and the countryside to help the army with getting settled in and dealing with the problems.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So that was sorting out the cull and the disposal of the carcasses?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, like I say they wanted someone with local knowledge they like to be well organised, they like to know what\rquote 
s going on so they wanted someone that had local knowledge of the area, so there was four of us.  They split Cumbria into four blocks and we each had an area and here Longtown that was my area.  There again that was helping
 me, I knew I was earning something but it was a long time before we got anything from that but at least I knew it was going to be there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Was your brother involved in that as well?}{\f0\insrsid12470915  
\par 
\par No, he does a relief-milking job every morning and he carried on with that.  The farmer were happy for him to carry on doing that. He weren\rquote 
t operating anywhere else. So that kept him a basic income for a few weeks to a month, and then by that time, just because of the natural course of things, work had to start happening agai
n and people had to start back again spreading slurry.  So he was back employed in that job again, so he carried on that side of it, and I was working in the operations room in Carlisle with the Army. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 With hindsight what was that experience like?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well i
t was very worrying, it was terrifying, once you realised it was starting to spread.   I mean the first farm you think they will contain it and you think surely in this day and age with the technology you expect, you know you think it's not going to move,
 you expect them to  them to be able to control it, so it\rquote s an initial shock when it\rquote 
s right on your doorstep.  Like I say when Robbie X was confirmed at S [PAUSE]  and then the next one a neighbouring farm not too far, David G at L Hill was one of the next
 ones.  I mean  we know David quite  well,  we do quite a bit of work for them, and that was really horrendous carry on because there were a lot of animals and major problems because nobody knew what they were doing at the time.  David's actually brother 
in law to chap that my brother milks for  and my brother was talking to him on the phone so we sort of knew all the problems he was having. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 And was this problem with the time of diagnosis, the cull?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, they slaughtered them quite quickly but they laid 
for nearly a fortnight in the buildings.  They were totally disorganised. They went in and they killed them just where they stood. Some where still in the cubicles, some were still near the feed barriers, and they said that they laid so long they were all
 blown up in the reports of what had happened. They couldn\rquote t get them out of the sheds, it was terrible and then when they did come, a lot of the operators of the machines weren\rquote t terribly professional I don\rquote 
t think, they did rather a lot of damage to his farm.  I mean it\rquote s all been put right since, it will have cost them a fortune to repair it but I mean David was on the television, he rang the television up he couldn\rquote 
t cope with it.  He's got young daughters and the animals were lying.  You could see them from the kitchen windows.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 This is the family that they offered hotel accommodation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No I don\rquote t think so, because at that point they weren\rquote t allowing anybody to leave their farms once they\rquote d been confirmed.  Within a week or so they seemed to change.  Lat
er on they were letting people clean up and leave their properties if they wanted to go.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But this was quite early on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well it was about the second or third farm confirmed in this area.  Once they were confirmed, that was them confined to barracks for how
ever long it took.   It took them [LONG PAUSE]   ten days to a fortnight before they even started to build his fire, then they made a mess of that, they couldn\rquote 
t get it to light or to burn.  Yeh, horrendous time of it.   We were all thinking this is what\rquote s
 going to happen, this is really taking off.  It was taking far too long, I mean Dad said In the outbreak of 67 it was all over and done with in 24 hours, they confirmed, killed them, they dug a hole and pushed them in, filled it in and that was it, that 
was the way they did it.  But then they decided they wanted to burn them all this time at the start, and   they were just completely not organised for it.  Then their thinking they\rquote 
re going to contain this with this and all the disorganisation this isn't going to work which is exactly what happened, so it was very [EMPHASIS]   worrying for the first fortnight.  Because you think well this is a livestock farming area if there\rquote 
s no livestock, which the way things were going at the time it looked as though we could be left with nothing or very little round about, this means there\rquote s going to be no work for us, apart from psychological [damage?].  I mean it\rquote 
s been bad enough this summer [PAUSE]   looking around at fields and seeing half of them being empty as it is when you\rquote re use to seeing sheep and cattle in the fields all the time.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par So in a way it affected not just your work but also your social life?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well we never went out, we'd no social life, especially when I started 
to work in the office down there, we never went out we never went anywhere, I mean I was only in an office but from time to time we were [EMPHASIS]  visiting infected farms and the office was classed as a dirty}{\b\f0\insrsid12470915  }{
\f0\insrsid12470915 site at the time so I don\rquote t think that many p
eople knew I was working down there.  You feel, I mean a lot of people that had foot and mouth at the start such as David G, you felt like lepers, you were shut off, you felt as though people didn\rquote 
t want to associate with you, not because of you personally but because they knew of the consequences [PAUSE]  we felt a bit that way ourselves [EMPHASIS]  we didn\rquote t go out we didn\rquote t go anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Do you normally  have a bit of a social life?}{\f0\insrsid12470915  
\par 
\par Well we try to but the business side of things doesn\rquote t allow for it.  Winter times we can have a night or two but summer time it\rquote s just impossible to have a night out at all, but that\rquote s just our business it\rquote 
s nothing to do with [PAUSE].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Can I ask about your wife S, does she have a farming background?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Her grandparents on both sides of the family were farmers, but her father's always just driven a lorry.         
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But you both have friends in farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 All are friends are farming and farming connected.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So did you find because you couldn\rquote t visit them ,
\par were you phoning?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, you had to talk to somebody from time to time.  I mean       talking on the phone, myself I don\rquote t like it, I\rquote d rather go and see somebody, be it business or social I\rquote 
d rather go and see them and talk to people face to face, I don\rquote t really like talking on the phone, I don\rquote t know why, but yeh, I mean it would drive you crackers if you didn\rquote 
t talk to someone [LONG PAUSE].  The neighbours next door, they live just next door to us here, they farm, their farm is  about 100 yards down the road there and they\rquote ve stayed clear all the time, they\rquote 
ve managed to survive, but they come around every now and again.  About once a fortnight they come round for a drink and a crack and to catch up on local gossip and one thing and another.  They still k
ept coming round but I must admit I felt uncomfortable when they came, because of that fear.   Get foot and mouth and they\rquote 
d been in our [EMPHASIS]    house.   But I mean they [EMPHASIS]  knew I was working down there.   But like I say, I had no contact, it was an office job basically, but it was just the fact that the site was classed as dirty.    \lquote 
Dirty'/Clean'  was a major thing at that time.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 The very word is quite loaded isn\rquote t it? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Like I said, they [EMPHASIS]   were happy to come round here but like we never went round there.  If they want to come then well it\rquote s up to them.  I mean it was highly unlikely but  like we don\rquote 
t really know yet [EMPHASIS]  how it was spread and we knew even less at that stage.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So how long did you work with the army?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
Seven, eight weeks [PAUSE]   I could have been there a lot longer but [LONG PAUSE] sometime in  March   [LONG PAUSE] I think, anyway it was the day [EMPHASIS]  the army came, sometime in March when the NFU rang us and I got involved.  The only reason I st
opped was because we were starting to get very busy at home.  The silaging work was starting and I needed to be at home because our [EMPHASIS]   work down there was a lot easier but it was a lot quieter mainly because the animals were being taken out by t
h
en.  There was very few of them left.  DEFRA were starting to take more control of that side of things.  I mean there were still cases at that point, especially in the Penrith Spur but not so much here. So our work at that point was mainly getting licence
s for people, stock moving licences  and licences for  people  such as myself to go on and off farms, that\rquote 
s what our work was mainly turned into.  In fact there was five of us at that point, there was another lad joined us later on so that boosted us up to five.  But erh I\rquote 
d say there was two of us that decided we were needed at home so that left 3 of them  to cope with the mainly licensing issues at that point.    
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par Which were quite a headache, weren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915  A major headache at the start.  The organisation was the problem they just could not [EMPHASIS] cope with it.  The Government all of a sudden decided that we would have to have licences for everything and I just don\rquote 
t [EMPHASIS]   think they realised how much work they were go
ing to create, and of course there were no facilities to cope with it.  And of course everyone was ringing up wanting to move animals and not knowing what they needed. For the first fortnight to three weeks defining what licence different movements came u
n
der  was a big deal because there were so many different things involved, so that became a headache, so we were involved in trying to help Defra staff communicate with farmers, you know define things, sort things out, sort problems out, that kind of thing
.  So it got to the point were there were a lot of welfare cases, desperately needing animals moved from the welfare point of view, but you couldn\rquote t do it without a licence, but if they couldn\rquote t get one, you couldn't do anything\'85
 that was quite difficult.  It was very upsetting.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So you\rquote re talking there about feed and things like that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Were you putting in quite long days in the beginning?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yeah, very long days [PAUSE]  Well, we were starting there about eight in the morning.  We had to go in at that 
time because there was a briefing every morning at eight thirty.  They would give out the figures and tell us what was happening.  I always tried to be on time for that.   It was usually eight or nine o clock at night before we were getting home and then 
you\rquote d spend an hour or so maybe on the phone at night talking to people and helping to try and sort problems out.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 These would be farmers, ringing you because they know you or because of your position in the army?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, partly because of that.  Wanting Information on what they could or couldn\rquote t do.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So what was happening to you throughout this?  I mean you were working very long hours and your son is now 18 months so he must have been just a few months old.  Your wife works full time.  You must have been exhausted?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 It didn\rquote 
t really affect me too much, I was working on autopilot, we were quite use to it be quite honest with you. Those are the sorts of hours we put in the business anyway, especially at that time of year.  Silage time we are usually out about
 six in the morning and not back until midnight or so, so we were use to those sort of hours [PAUSE]   for different reasons obviously.  We were use to the pressure but for different reasons.   In the middle of silage time everybody wants you.  We were ba
sically trying to do the same sort of thing, the principles were the same, you know, for what we were trying to achieve at the time but of course for completely different reasons and with completely different consequences.  So on that point of view I
\rquote m quit
e good at being able to switch myself off.  I coped by just trying to keep occupied, trying to do something to help really.  I think that made me [EMPHASIS]    feel a little bit better in myself because for that first week or two at the start you felt tot
ally helpless.  We weren\rquote t involved as in such that we didn\rquote t have any animals so we weren\rquote t a risk that way, so we couldn\rquote 
t really feel what the farmers were going through, although it was affecting us, you know, from a work point of view, day to day.   So
 when we got the chance to get involved in trying to help somehow [PAUSE]   because we were all trying to fight the same cause.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But were you able to come home and sleep and eat and do those ordinary things?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 It\rquote s not a problem.  That\rquote s not a problem for me.  Sleeping [PAUSE]  I probably had a few restless nights but I don\rquote t need much sleep.  I think the busier I am and the less sleep I can get away with.  I\rquote 
m fortunate that way.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915  I mean I know what you're saying and obviously with your business there w
here times when you were under a huge amount of pressure and you just dealt with it, but did you feel in control of what you where doing.  Did it make sense at the time?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par No [PAUSE]  no not really.  I mean nobody [EMPHASIS]     was in control that was the problem at the time.  It was just a case of tunnel vision, trying to push forward and trying to achieve what we were asked.  Anything we were asked to do we\rquote 
d do it, just get on with it, try and stop so many people going through the trauma that we\rquote 
ve seen others going through.  Just trying to achieve [EMPHASIS]  something [LONG PAUSE].  There was just so much going on at the time and we were so busy and it was just\'85    we probably become a little bit blas\'e9
 to what was happening because we were seeing it. I was seeing every case come through [PAUSE]   working in the office down there.   We were seeing every case.  Not necessarily blas\'e9 but probably more use to it because we were seeing every c
ase come through and the markers going up on the board [in the army control room, marking the spread of the disease]. Each one then becomes not just as personal as the last one if you like, even though we knew the farmers, we knew the customers, friends, 
relatives and the lot, but it comes a point when you think, that\rquote s another one, because there was so [EMPHASIS] many. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 You said that there were times when you had to visit IPs [infected premises]? Is that right?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 We did at the beginning but the first [PAUS
E] week to a fortnight we were busy protecting premises with the army.  I think the army came on the Thursday or the Friday and we started that afternoon on it.  The soldier that was in charge of this area, I mean he was an Officer, as we called him.  Eac
h farm had his own liaison officer, and there was a liaison officer for the area.  I was working with the one for the area for the few days, because the offices weren\rquote 
t set up at that point, we were working out of the back of the trucks in the car park.  We were just in a land rover with a list of names and going to visit them to see if there were any problems on the farms that had been slaughtered.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So did you witness the slaughter teams in operation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No, I was there actually revisiting farms.  All the far
ms we visited were slaughtered when we got there.  To be quite honest I never actually saw an animal being put down.  I visited a lot of farms, we just went to the farm to see the farmer and talk to him basically.  There were probably a lot of people that
 saw a lot more than I did to be honest.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Those visits must have been difficult, because you might have known them.  What was that like?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par Yes I knew most of them because they were all farmers in this area.
\par I knew them all.  Very difficult [PAUSE]    to walk onto the farm because you didn\rquote 
t know what condition the farmer and his family were going to be in.    But I have to say, we were received quite well by all [EMPHASIS]     of them really.  No problems really.   Ninety percent of people I think they just r
ealised that once the disease was confirmed, that\rquote s what had to happen.  Major problems came thereafter when they weren\rquote t getting the carcasses destroyed, that\rquote 
s when the problems started.  Most [EMPHASIS]  people seemed to be able to resign themselves to the fact that their animals had to be slaughtered and so they didn\rquote t complain, but they couldn\rquote 
t cope with these animals lying about for days and weeks afterwards, it was always there in the yard and they couldn\rquote t get away from it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Was that just the sheer volume?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 There just wasn\rquote t the organisation.  Yes the sheer volume.  MAFF got terribly behind at the start.  Then by the time the army came\'85
  I had no [EMPHASIS]  idea that things were in such a state until I went down there and I stated getting paper wor
k with the numbers up.  The animals that had been slaughtered and the number of farms that had been affected, I had no idea it was even like as bad [EMPHASIS]    at that point.  There was a list as long as your arm with farms that were slaughtered but the
 
animals were still there [EMPHASIS]  because there was nothing to burn them with.   Farmers were starting to get the idea themselves that it was being spread by the smoke from the fires, so nobody wanted a fire, and they were making such a mess of burning
 them anyway because they were using all the wrong materials.  It took weeks [EMPHASIS]  to burn.  They were using the wrong materials, they were trying to economise at the time, they were trying to save money.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 This is the coal story?}{\f0\insrsid12470915  
\par 
\par Yes.  Well they were using power station coal, which is not as cheap, but it\rquote s not as good a quality because it\rquote s used to heat up the furnaces at the power station.  But to try and burn it out on an open field you need the best quality.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Talking about the pyres, what do you think about the idea of them spreading the infection?     
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I don\rquote t think it was them that were spreading it.  The infection was being spread from the animals that were still alive [PAUSE].  That\rquote s more based on what I learned from working down there, bu
t a lot of people still believe that.  I find it hard to believe it was spread that way when you talk to the vets and the ministry people.   People were thinking  [PAUSE]\'85
one farmer [PAUSE] they would light a fire at one farm and two days later the next farm had foot and mouth, getting it off the smoke.  But that wasn\rquote 
t the case because a week to a fortnight incubation period is needed, so the farm next door had probably picked it up from the loaders with animals that were still alive.  It\rquote s just logical th
inking, they lit that fire and two days later I got foot and mouth, well if the wind [EMPHASIS]   can blow the smoke into his next door neighbours the wind is also blowing the hair off his live cattle before they were slaughtered into his yard, you know.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 There was a lot of fear as well wasn\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well they still don\rquote t really know.  I mean there was a lot of cases they couldn\rquote t explain how they got it and there were a lot of places where you couldn\rquote t explain how they didn\rquote 
t [EMPHASIS]  get it.  There were two farms on this road who hadn\rquote 
t had foot and mouth.  Once they started to take the carcasses away rather than bury them on the farm, ninety percent of them came past this front door [EMPHASIS].  They all went to the airf
ield just across the way there, they all came in this way.  Every wagon probably came past here [PAUSE],  that was probably one of the worst things.  I think that was probably worse [EMPHASIS]  than actually working with it because when you came home of a
 
night and started hearing the wagons, because they all came at night, it was one after the other, convoys [PAUSE]  twelve, fifteen wagons at a time.  They always worked at night time so you would just get home but you could never relax, you just had to tr
y and relax a little bit then the wagons [EMPHASIS]    would start to come in.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 These are the S wagons?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Which everybody knew what they were about because they\rquote re sealed aren\rquote t they?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well they\rquote re supposed to be but there were some that weren\rquote t, especially at the start there was a few problems.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 There were some that weren\rquote t?}{\f0\insrsid12470915   
\par 
\par Some wagons mistakes were made,}{\b\f0\insrsid12470915  }{\f0\insrsid12470915 lets put it that way. There were cows legs sticking out, I could see that.  There was no way they would let them leave the farms with th
at happening because you know what actually happens to an animal when it dies it blows up, so things start to move so\'85 but it probably happened during transit, but those sort of thing were definitely happening.  It was that sort of thing that\'85}{
\b\f0\insrsid12470915  }{\f0\insrsid12470915 when you saw a wagon go past and you knew [EMPHASIS]  it was carrying infected carcasses that was the sort of thing that always worries people.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par And that happened for quite some time did it, the convoys?}{\f0\insrsid12470915      
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915   
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes, all the time [EMPHASIS], right up until the last  load that we knew of came from the last outbreak A town which was [}{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 TAPE INAUDIBLE}{\f0\insrsid12470915 ] 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Towards the end of September?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par Yeah I think so, they came to H
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par What do you feel about that, does it worry you in terms of where you live and the proximity of the site?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Er
m no I mean l the fact that they had checked the site.  I meant it is a farm and he has stocked again. There's, there is about six hundred head of cattle down there now. So the diggers are in at the moment still putting things back together.  Everything i
s gone [EMPHASIS] }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 [TAPE INAUDIBLE]}{\f0\insrsid12470915   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 What about the refuse tip at H Wood.  How do you feel about that?   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well personally I didn't think they should be doing it but didn\rquote t have much option.  The sheer volume, I don\rquote 
t think anybody realised . In first week that the army came we shifted ninety seven thousand carcasses in the first week but they were still a long way behind.  Yeah in the first week.  They hadn't got up by a long way. There was still a lot of farms with
 animals lying around for days at a time.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Obviously there were a lot of protests? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par Yeah there were meetings at Longtown
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Did you get to any of them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I was asked to go but I decided to keep out of it because of my position down there.  The army over stepp
ed the mark a little bit with that one.  Between the army and the farmer himself, the farmer at H is not a popular man as you can imagine.  He [EMPHASIS]   didn\rquote 
t have any option and I [EMPHASIS] know that, because I was involved with the army when they set that up over night. It  was desperate at that point it really [EMPHASIS]   was desperate that day, I\rquote ll not forget that day.  They hadn\rquote 
t got the contract signed, to take that site over. It was a Saturday morning and they hadn\rquote t got the contract signed u
ntil eleven o clock on a Saturday morning when the lorries were being loaded with the carcasses to go there because they had nowhere else for them to go that day.  Everything was crammed up, they didn\rquote 
t know what the hell they were going to do that night if they hadn\rquote t got that site that day.  They didn\rquote t know where all these lorries were going to go. They were loading them that day but they didn\rquote 
t know where they were taking them that night to park them up if they hadn\rquote t got that signed on that day. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Do you know why that site was chosen?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I think they needed something with that expansive area, so it had to be disused airfields that fitted the bill, the same at Great Orton .  At that point this was quite a central site to where the majority of the carcasses
 were.  There were a few farms on the outside edge of the infected area  they wouldn\rquote t have wanted them bringing the carcasses out, this was in the middle, so the site fitted the bill, the access was quite good.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But that was in operation for quite some time?  Longer perhaps than anticipated?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No. they took  on the lease for twelve months.
\par  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Just going back In terms of the pyres, did that affect you personally, were you aware of them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 I was aware of the smoke.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 What was that like?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 It was terrible.  There\rquote s nothing worse than the smell of burning flesh.  I remember that first week or two before, when we were just spending all our time in the yard preparing and it\rquote s quite high up, it\rquote 
s on top of the hill, you can see all the fires, all the carry on, nobody wanted the carry on, you could see all the smoke in the valley.  It was a terrible sight to see.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Did the smell [of burning flesh]  affect you? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 After a while you sort of accept it.  There was talk of the toxins and the way it could affect our [EMPHASIS]   health.  It was continual, which is also a little bit worrying.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Does that worry you now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No not really.  I\rquote m not a one for dwelling on things; it\rquote s out of my control. If it\rquote s something you can control yourself then fair enough but it\rquote s out of most [EMPHASIS] people\rquote s control.  There
\rquote s nothing you can do about it, if we\rquote re affected by it or if it does affect us in the future there\rquote s not a lot we can do.  If it\rquote s going to happen it will happen whether you worry about it or you don\rquote t.   It\rquote s so
mething that you think about from time to time.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Your son would be only six months when that was going on, did he suffer from coughs or sore throat at the time?
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par No, we weren\rquote t affected.   Actually living here we didn\rquote t get a lot of the smoke here, it was just the way the winds were at the time.  There was very [EMPHASIS] odd days when we were affected by it.  It didn\rquote 
t really come this way, we got more of it when I was up at my parents place.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 How were your parents through out all of this, they must have been quite worried for you and your brother?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Well yes, they were worried about what was going to happen to our business and worried about their position because we sort of support them a little bit because my brother lives at home and looks after the pr
operty for them.  Me mother has a part time job in a shop, me Dad's retired.  We were all worried at the time.  We were just relieved that I could get something to do.  We desperately tried in the first week or two to try and to work with the tractors and
 machines just to help move the carcasses out into the pyres and this sort of thing but it was a closed shop, I couldn\rquote 
t believe it.  We tried to get in with the bigger contractors such as Ms and Ken H and those people.  We tried to contract, we had the time and the machines, we don\rquote t particularly want to have to do this type of work but if we can help and it
\rquote s going to help us make a living basically we will do it, but they wouldn\rquote t take us on.   There was contractors such as ourselves that did [EMPHASIS]   get in eventually, I don\rquote t know how [EMPHASIS]  they did because I mean I couldn
\rquote t even get in to get some of our machines on after I started to work down [EMPHASIS]    there with the DEFRA, MAFF as it was then,  people.  A lot of people said the same thi
ng, people from all sorts of professions were offering help but it was being turned away.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 So really it caused some divisions amongst the local work force?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Oh yes definitely.  There\rquote s been so many changes and changed the course of many peoples lives I sho
uld imagine, apart from just the farmers a lot of other people.  I mean a lot of people lost their jobs over night.  It was worrying for us but we knew that we would find something [EMPHASIS],    I mean you have to.   When you own your own business you ha
ve got to find work.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 When you were working with the army, did you ever feel that there was hostility towards you from local people?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 No, I can\rquote t say that [PAUSE].   No I never saw any evidence of that, but I was [EMPHASIS]    worried about that.   From a p
ersonal point of view I was worried about that.  From a professional point of view as well, if people decided they didn\rquote 
t like what was happening, especially with this carry on at H  [FARM].  I was a bit worried at that point because people knew I was working down there and they expected me to have inside information which I didn\rquote t have because I [EMPHASIS]    didn
\rquote t know this was going to happen, nobody [EMPHASIS]  knew this was going to happen, until [PAUSE]   there was a mention of it on the Thursday [PA
USE]  and things were getting tighter and tighter and tighter and on the Saturday morning, there was a big carry on that morning to get it organised because I think [EMPHASIS]   the rendering plant was shut down and they wouldn\rquote 
t take anything that day bec
ause they were over capacity and they had to find somewhere to take everything from that day's slaughter, and just to try and catch up.  So I was very [EMPHASIS]   worried at that point as to whether people would take offence and the fact that they though
t I knew more about this and I didn\rquote t tell anybody.   I know when the neighbours were around one night, I said about this and I said, I hope people don\rquote t think\'85
 because they were speaking to the neighbouring farmers more than I was.  I was trying to keep a low profile\'85 I said I hope people weren\rquote t thinking that I knew more than I did because I didn\rquote 
t.  That as I say was very worrying at the time.  From a social point of view it could have ruined the business as well.  We depend on the local farmers and they could say, you didn\rquote 
t really look after us when you had the chance to.  As I say, that was a worrying point.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 But in spite of that your customers starting coming back?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Did that reassure you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Oh yes that helped a lot.  During the time the barbeque [large pyre burning] was on}{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 , }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
then once they stopped that, that seemed to settle a lot of people locally, once they put that fear out.   Nobody was happy about all the carcasses coming in at once so that put a lot of people's mind at ease, not at rest, at ease. }{
\b\f0\insrsid12470915 [Tape inaudible] 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Finally, what was the worst aspect of the foot and mouth outbreak for you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 [LONG PAUSE]    Just the sheer waste I think really. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Of the stock? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid12470915 Of animals.  Such a
 lot of innocents shall we say, were slaughtered.  It was something [PAUSE]    because of the work that I was doing you realise it was the only way they were going to stop it.  At that point it had gone to far and that was the only thing you could do to t
ry and alter the spread.   I think the worst image that sticks in my mind was the first day of the live [EMPHASIS]  sheep cull and I went to the slaughter house to help them un load their lorries and wash them out.   I\rquote 
m not a lover of sheep, I was not a sheep farmer I was a dairy farmer.  So unloading the ewes or the feeding sheep as it were, the older sheep, took them [EMPHASIS]    to the slaughter house.  Well that\rquote 
s not a lot different to what happens to them anyway, most of them, but the worst thing was
 when they started bringing trailer loads of new born lambs in.  That was terrible, we had to go in and unload them but it had [EMPHASIS]   to be done.   We unloaded the trailer and drove them into a pen and got out of there as quick as possible because y
ou can hear them, the animals bleating as they were being herded up to be put down.  Absolutely Innocent young lives.  As I say, I\rquote m not a lover of sheep by any means but those poor little things were only days old, they\rquote 
d done nothing.  I think that\rquote s probably one of the worst images [EMPHASIS] I have of that day. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Does that come back to you sometimes?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 It doesn\rquote t come back as a regular thing [EMPHASIS]    but it does come up when you start to talk about it, like in this instance. I don\rquote t get flashbacks or any thing like that.  Our next door farmer }{
\b\f0\insrsid12470915 [Tape inaudible}{\f0\insrsid12470915 ], he had foot and mouth and he\rquote s getting his dairy cows back next week so he\rquote 
s looking forward to that, so he still discusses things round the subject.  It will be another twelve months I should imagine before it\rquote s all forgotten until everybody settles back into their routine again.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 Was there anything good that came out of foot and mouth for you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 [LONG PAUSE]   No I don\rquote t think so. I mean we haven\rquote t suffered financially really.  Physically, probably a little bit but there\rquote 
s a hell [EMPHASIS]   of a lot more work this last year.  From a business point of view things are certainly up, they're not down.  There\rquote s been a hell of a lot more work.   Mainly disinfecting.  So I\rquote d not say we\rquote ve suffered 
other than having to deal with what happened.  I can\rquote t really say there was anything good to be quite honest with you.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 How do you see the future?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 The future.  Farmer\rquote s attitudes and other people\rquote s attitudes are a lot better now and the animals are back on the farms again, everything cleaned up.  I\rquote 
m quite [EMPHASIS]   sure a lot of farms have benefited from it, I\rquote m quite sure of that to be honest.  Certain amount of farmers were wondering where they were going to go, what they going to do to try and improve things.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par But those that didn\rquote t get compensation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 They just string along or either fall by the way side or they survive.  Those are the people that have been hit hardest by this [PAUSE]   financially anyway. You can\rquote t take it way from the people who had
 to go through this.  Anybody you talk to say it\rquote s very nice to have money.  A few farmers I\rquote ve talked to quite openly say, financially it\rquote 
s definitely helped us, we are in a lot better position financially than they were this time last year.  I haven\rquote t spoken to one of them that said they wouldn\rquote t rather have the animals that they had than take the money . 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid12470915 And the breeding lines?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12470915 There are odd people that have managed to trace breeding lines through people that have sold animals to them over the years
, so they may get some of the blood lines back.  The majority of breeding lines they tend to stay in the same area, so there\rquote s a good chance they were all taken out.  The future, well there\rquote 
s going to be a lot of changes anyway [EMPHASIS].  The Government seem to be using this time to make a lot of changes in farming policy.    
\par 
\par [At this Point A went into details about the Government introducing new legislation that will affect how and when slurry is spread.  A is very concerned about this as it could have a drastic and negative impact on his business]
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\i\f0\insrsid12470915 I asked A if he had anything to add and thanked him very much for his time.  We had been talking for well over an hour.}{\f0\insrsid12470915 
\par }}