{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{
\s20\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{
\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid6292747\rsid7421093\rsid8549870\rsid11888143}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr11\min44}{\printim\yr2002\mo2\dy18\hr8\min18}
{\version3}{\edmins0}{\nofpages26}{\nofwords7867}{\nofchars44846}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws52608}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace0\dgvspace0\dghorigin0\dgvorigin0\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot8549870 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid7421093 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid8549870 Lancaster University}{\insrsid7421093 
\par Interview ID:  PM36
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\insrsid7421093 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid11888143 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs17\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid7421093 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 4}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}04/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid7421093 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid7421093 Date of birth: 1940
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid7421093 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 Occupation: Group 3}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid7421093 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs22\super\insrsid7421093 \chftn }{\insrsid7421093  }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Group 1 }{
\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid7421093 

\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid7421093 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\insrsid7421093 
\par 
\par }{\insrsid7421093 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Tell me a bit about how you think the foot and mouth 
\par crisis affected you and your family?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par Well obviously its affected us in more ways than one but one of the initial upsets when it really got going was are we going to have a job you know.  I mean, all right there\rquote s people younger than me,  probably paying m
ortgages and young families would be worse off than what I was.  I mean I haven\rquote t that many years go to until I retire.  But at the end of the day you still want a job, you\rquote 
ve still got to make a penny to eat, a slice of bread type of thing haven\rquote t you?  And you know, I used to come home at night, well the wife didn\rquote t use to say anything to us cause she knew I was upset and she was upset cause I mean we\rquote 
ve had a lot of friends gone down with it, a lot of friends.  I mean, I come from farming background, me 
dad was a farmer, me brother, well he was a farmer until he retired in a small way.  I mean obviously when I first left school I er, I went and worked on a farm because the farm wasn\rquote 
t big enough at home for me and me brother and me dad.  And then I thought well there\rquote 
s easier ways of making a bloody living [laugh].  And I got out of it, argh well I went to wagon driving, I think it was the worst bloody mistake I ever made.  But over the years you know, you look back and you think well no I wouldn\rquote t have se
en this, I wouldn\rquote t have seen that if it  hadn\rquote t happened, if I hadn\rquote t done this.  But no its er, I mean the wife\rquote 
s family was farmers as well and I think with coming from farming background what have you, we had our finger on the pulse probably more than 
what a lot of people would have had and we understood the heartache and hardship that they were  having.  I mean, yeah compensation most certainly has been better this time than it was in the 1967 outbreak without a doubt.  But at the end of the day what 
is compensation?  I mean, yeah, some of them you hear such exorbitant figures.  I mean, I have a friend he was in Leicester, pedigree Leicester sheep and his went not to through Foot & Mouth but through the cull.  And he couldn\rquote 
t bear to see them go.  My wi
fe went down and helped his wife to load them onto the wagon.  You know just, they were part of the family to him.  And he knew every sheep by you know, our (24) and things like that they were part of the family.  I mean it was upsetting to his wife and t
o my wife even though they weren\rquote t \'85\'85 my wife, sheep type of thing you know.  I mean, she went down helped them load them and she was in a hell of a state like.  I mean,  I\rquote 
ve had farmers ring me up at work with me being as I say, I started general haulage then I went to what was the old Milk Marketing Board which changed to Milk Mart and what have you, over the years, there\rquote 
s been all sorts of things, now its Milk, and its in the throws of changing again.  But they\rquote ve tried, they\rquote ve tried for a number of years to get me up in the office and I would never go, I used to keep saying, \'93no I\rquote 
m no good till the outside on the wagons\'94.  Er, about 3\'bd years I think roughly somewhere in there they persuaded me, well they didn\rquote t persuade me, they got me in a corner in the office where I couldn\rquote 
t escape.  And I used to, every time they asked me, I used to say, \'93I\rquote ll think about it, I\rquote ll think about it\'94.  But this particular night they got me in the corner of the office and as I was saying \'93think about it\'94 I used to open
 the door and disappear out but they cornered me and I couldn\rquote t get out.  And I still said I would think about it.  But the next morning I was told, \'93your in this bloody office from now\'94 you know.  I\rquote 
ve had possibly more contact with a bigger number of farm
ers through being in the office than I possibly would have had on the wagon, cause I mean you get your own runs and your in an area  and what have you.  And you know every time a farmer rang up after the \'85\'85
 well when the first outbreak was, I heard it on the news, used to have the radio on in the office and I heard it on the news and I thought oh my God how far is this gonna go?  All right its in Northumberland it\rquote 
s a bit away from us, but as the crow flies how far is Hexham from Penrith?  It isn\rquote t even tha
t, as the crow flies you know.  And my first initial thoughts was back to 1976.  I  mean  I remembered, I remember too well what it was like then.  I immediately contacted my bosses higher up and I said, \'93look we should be doing something for this\'94
.  \'93No don\rquote t worry, don\rquote t worry yet you know\'94.  And I says, \'93no its no good doing it after its happened\'94.  And this probably shouldn\rquote t be on the tape like but never mind, they wouldn\rquote 
t listen to me.  Er, I think they thought I was panicking, but I wasn\rquote t and I pro
ved to be not panicking.  And eventually I did something, I did it on me own, I rang a farmer up and asked him if I could have some bales of straw to put in t he gateway, to put disinfectant down and I took it into me own hands.  And yeah, they\rquote 
ve never come and thanked me yet, but I mean that\rquote 
s beside the point.  I mean, in my eye I was as far as Penrith Depot was concerned we were seen to be doing something.  And then as I say you got a phone call one after the other.  And each time there\rquote s a phone call c
ame well, you had to start and re-hash the routes which wasn\rquote t easy.  Because I mean, you\rquote d have an area where you\rquote 
d have you know, your two kilometre area what have you, the farms was classed as A farms and what have you and you had to pick them up last on the route.  So \'85\'85..
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Well quite often, I mean, officially I should finish sort of 5, half past at night, quite often I was there at half past 7, half past 8 and 9 o\rquote clock.  You\rquote d just be ready to go home, they\rquote 
d be three or four phone calls you had to start and rehash the loads again.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 How many weeks were you doing that for?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Oooooh, I can\rquote 
t remember.  It went on for so long.  I mean, at the finish yeah it got easier because I mean at first it was here, there, a
nd everywhere.  At the finish it seemed to concentrate in an area for maybe a week or a fortnight and then it would jump out of that area into another one.  Whereas at the beginning you\rquote d get one isolated on its own and you\rquote 
d get another isolated on its ow
n in another area.  You know, all right Longtown area was hit pretty hard at the beginning but you were also getting them in other areas at the same time.   Whereas at the finish I mean, we had, well I think Kirkby Stephen, Avonsworth and up there was the
 last area to be really hit other than Nedhead and there.  But Nedhead wasn\rquote t really affecting us really cause we don\rquote 
t pick milk up over that side, but er, it did possibly get well slightly easier.  And then of course they fetched out the Penworth Spurn wh
at have you and made things difficult again.  But er, we were so used with it by then [laugh] we were able to do it sort of in our sleeps you know.  But er \'85\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 You must have been knackered by then?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It was very stressful.  Er, the wife used to know when I 
came in at night, she used to know by the look on me face whether to wind me up or not type of thing, you know.  It er, and then the biggest job was getting someone to drive, they must disinfect at every farm and I mean, yeah we kept our drivers, we were 
f
ortunate, we were fortunate in some ways, we were unfortunate in other ways.  Some of the drivers left through ill health, not because of the Foot & Mouth, not stretched from that or anything.  Although there was one lad he got hisself really wound up ove
r the Foot & Mouth and seemed to think he was the only one in the depot that was doing it right, and he wasn\rquote 
t the other lads were.  Er, finished up, he left us and within a week he was, well within 10 days I should say, he was dead, but he contracted cance
r.  But it happened so much.  We sometimes wonder, yeah he had the cancer, but we wonder if the stress brought it to a head.  Er, you know there\rquote s things like that but we were fortunate in one sense as I say we didn\rquote 
t have to pay any drivers off, we were very close to it and at the same time I thought, well am I gonna be one of them you know?  Even though I\rquote ve been there 32 year it still, you think in the back of your mind, well you are getting towards the 
\lquote sell by date\rquote  type of thing, will they have shot of me?  On the other hand it possibly would have been too expensive to get shot of somebody like me what it would cost in redundancy you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 Must have been a worrying time for you?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Oh it was a worrying time.  And I mean, you know the wife was worried as well, what\rquote 
s gonna happen?  I have a son who works in the animal feed business for a firm that makes cattle food.  We were worrying about him as well.  And er, fortunately there was pay-off\rquote s where he worked but he didn\rquote 
t get paid off, you know, he was one of the lucky ones again.  But he was, well he was what\rquote s \'93classed as a '\lquote key operator' at the firm where he works and there\rquote 
s only about five or six of them, so I suppose he was lucky in that sense you know.  But it\rquote s just difficult to put your finger on
 really how, what it has affected people with and you know you may have bits of ailments and you come home at night and you have aches and pains, is it natural aches and pains or is it through stress you know?  I mean, I\rquote 
m confident in the bottom yeah a lot of its related to er, worry of what was gonna happen and what have you, you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
What went through your mind when you first heard about the outbreak?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Well I mean, coming from a farming background, I mean, the first thing that goes through your mind is it just gonna be an isolated case or is it going to be? \'85\'85
  And I mean, at the time there was a firm hauling milk from us over the Northumberland side into our depot at Penrith on the reload side.  You know, that was one of the reasons why I wanted disinfectant pad down right away because I says, \'93
well what are they gonna bring with them?\'94  Fortunately I don\rquote t think, despite what a lot of people said, I don\rquote t think that the milk targets ever did spray or were proved to spray in any way.  I mean a lot of pe
ople would have liked to have the tanker drivers of the vehicles but no, I don\rquote t think we did.  I mean if they had, I mean those farms we were going into sort of there, there, and there, that one in the middle wouldn\rquote 
t get Foot & Mouth.  Now if the vehicles were spreading it they would have got it as well, wouldn\rquote t they?  But you know, I mean your initial thoughts when you first hear of it, where did it come from?  And you know you think well it\rquote 
s an isolated case and then it just, I mean it just went well haywire type of thing and everybody had it in a matter of \'85.. it went from one end of the country to the other it was, at one stage weren\rquote t it?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
I mean yeah, Cumbria, Cumbria was the worst  hit of them all but er, argh, I\rquote m probably a cynic I don\rquote 
t know, but I do honestly think it was manufactured.  And a lot of people laughs at me and I still tend to blame the likes of Sadam Hussein for it, germ warfare.  I mean Sadam Hussein always said he would get back at the people who fought him in the Golf 
War and who knows?  And I mean, its all right talking after its happened but when you get talking to people you don\rquote 
t know how much truth is in these stories of course but you hear of them stocking up wood for making fires and that way back in February, er 
in November.  And I mean, did the government know something?  I mean I have a friend who one of his relations went to New Zealand in about November or December and he got off the aeroplane in New Zealand and the first thing he had to do was strip his clot
hes and be disinfected and what have you.  And he says, \'93what\rquote s this for?\'94  \'93Oh your, continent\rquote s got Foot & Mouth in Great Britain\'94 somebody knew something somewhere despite them ever denying that they ever knew.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 There\rquote re different rumour aren\rquote t there?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah,  yeah.  I mean there\rquote 
s a rumour that these Animal Rights people got into Portadown and got a file out of there with Foot & Mouth Disease in.  But I mean I can\rquote t honestly believe that because if they\rquote re Animal Rights, they\rquote re supposed to be looking aft
er the welfare of animals why would they want to spread Foot & Mouth?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
With you remembering 1967, when the farmers were ringing you up, were they asking you questions about Foot & Mouth?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Not really, they were just, they\rquote 
d got it and you know, well I mean possibly sometimes they would say they\rquote re gonna take them and where are they gonna slaughter them?  And I would possibly say, "well why aren\rquote t they burying them, burning them?\'94  \'93
Oh well Friends of the Earth thinks its gonna contaminate the water field and what have you\'94.  I mean I remember \rquote 67 well I mean, you\rquote d go past a farm in the morning you\rquote 
d see them obviously herding the beasts up to slaughter them, when you came back again later in the day, they were in a pit,   they were either fired or covered wi
th lime you know, I mean, they were gone.  I mean there were beasts slaughtered this time and laid for days before they were, anything was done with them.  Well it just wasn\rquote t on.  I mean, badly organised.  To me the government, all right it wasn
\rquote t the same government in now in what\rquote s in \rquote 67 but I mean, they keep records of everything and to me they hadn\rquote t learned a thing, not a thing.  I mean, there was bound to be veterinaries alive that was there in \rquote 
67.  I mean, I\rquote m still alive \lquote int I unfortunate for so
me people? [laugh]  But you know there was bound to be veterinaries alive that knew the procedure then and even if they were retired they should have called on them for their know-how.  I mean right from the outset the army should have been brought in.  I
 mean, you\rquote ve got the likes of David McClean (Penrith and Borders PM), all right there\rquote s a lot of people doesn\rquote 
t like him as a politician.  I mean, his not a fan of mine but er, in the same thing he was the only politician in my mind that ever talked any sense.  And I think they\rquote 
d be a lot more people would agree with me on t his.  I mean,  once they brought the army in, all right they didn\rquote t stop the Foot & Mouth right away, but I mean they did start to get shot of the animals and what have you and clean up
 the farms and there was none of this lying a week before they were moved or anything like that, they were shot and moved the same day.  I know its all right us sitting here saying that, it would be difficult, I know it would but \'85\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Was it difficult for y
ou handling calls from farmers, it must have been stressful?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It was, especially farmers that you knew and farmers that you
\rquote d known for years.  I mean there\rquote s one of the farms well there\rquote s A, I mean, you must have heard his name mentioned numerous times.  They bought my wife\rquote s father\rquote 
s farm, they had the farm next door to it and they bought the wife\rquote s father\rquote s farm and I mean there was the two brother\rquote s, there was L and B.  And B rang me up first of all and I'll be honest with you, I shed tears with him.  A
nd then of course I had to ring head office down at Keele to tell them and er, there was one of the girls I spoke to, she was always quite a friendly girl over the phone and very understanding.  And I think both of us was in tears before I finished with h
er, you know.  And then of course later on at night possibly about half past 10 at night, L himself rung me and he says, \'93has my brother been on to your house?\'94  I says, \'93yes he has\'94
 and of course there was tears again and there was tears with the wife because as far as we were concerned it was still part of the family with it being a family farm you know.  And then I mean me brother had to get shot of his, his\'85\'85
 Well he just had a few sheep, he had to get shot of them in a continuous cull because the farmer
 right next to him, well virtually over the hedge from him, got Foot & Mouth so his sheep had to go with a contiguous cull.  And then we had a very good friend who well I went to school with him.  I mean, we\rquote 
d been friends from school days type of thing they got it.  I mean they\rquote d sold the farm and they\rquote d bought another farm in the meantime.  They weren\rquote t allowed to move off the farm, they weren\rquote 
t allowed to go to the new farm.  And er, I mean the daughter of this particular family I\rquote m talking about, I chauffeured the daughter to her wedding.  She rung me up and says \'93I want you to take me R\'94 you know and they\rquote 
ve been family friends.  I suppose with being connected to the farming background you know, probably had a lot more friends in the farming world than a lot of ordinary people would have done.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah.  I mean you must have felt at times like you couldn
\rquote t get away from it, what with your work and with your friends  as well?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 At home yeah, yeah.  I mean, well I\rquote 
ve a cousin who got it when it was, well we thought when it was on the wane I mean a cousin over at Brampton side, he got it, they\rquote 
d never been off the premises you know.  And of course there again you, I mean your not crying, but I mean obviously you are shedding tears you just can\rquote t help it, its an emotional thing like \lquote 
int it?  And I mean, well I mean, this cousin that got it, I mean his mother and my dad were twins so I mean we were very close anyway.  And we regularly visit them back and forward, well I\rquote ve seen him once since Foot & Mouth started 
last February and that was after he\rquote d been diagnosed as clean before he got it in his \'85\'85\'85  I mean we hadn\rquote 
t been at their farm but he came over here to see us like my family you know.  But we  rung em up, we were gonna go over, and he says, \'93well I\rquote ve just started to get (inaudible) they\rquote ll stop you in (inaudible) you\rquote 
d better keep away\'94.  And now his feeling, his wife can\rquote t get him to go out anywhere because he feels dirty you know.  And you know it\rquote s a hell of a thing like.  I mean some people have gone out and doesn\rquote 
t seem to have bothered them.  But others really conscious of having had it and \'85\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Was your social life affected last year as well?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Well there\rquote 
s a friend, the friend that I was talking about before that had the Leicester\rquote s we used to quite often go out for a bar meal together you know.  Well I mean for a stage I used to go and help him on me day\rquote 
s off and what have you for a while I was never on his actual premises.  And if I was I was virtually drowned in disinfectant before I went in you kn
ow.  Er, he used to come up here and see us and what have you.  But I mean he just lives in the village not so far away from us.  And another farmer just over the road from us, turning in our lane, we used to socialise with him for quite a bit, hardly eve
r went near him you know.  It just, well you daren't go anywhere.  And then of course I was the villain because I\rquote m chairman of the parish council and I decided in me wisdom one morning I\rquote 
m closing all the footpaths before it was announced they were gonna close them.  You know I thought to hell with this, why should they be walking over everybody\rquote s land?  Fortunately when I came back from \'85
.. I made some notices up meself I went round to the lad next door that has his in business and he has a computer and wh
at have you.  And I got him to make me some notices up on the computer in big, bold writing.  Fortunately when I came back from putting them up there\rquote 
s a letter through the post that all the foot paths should be closed [laugh] so I said I read their minds you know.  And then you got the hastle, \'93when are you gonna open the foot paths again?\'94  You\rquote 
d get odd ones walking down and insisting that they should come through.  And I mean there was one Saturday, I mean I don\rquote t know if you noticed when you came down 
the lane there its all been newly tarmaced and that stone walls been rebuilt.  Well I spent all last summer rebuilding that stone wall on me own.  There was one Saturday me son came out and he said, \'93I\rquote ll give you a bit of hand dad\'94 he says 
\'93I\rquote m no good at building stone walls but I can fill the middle in for you\'94 and I says \'93I that\rquote ll do me\'94.  There\rquote 
s two lads from, there were two Geordie lads came down and they were hell bent on going through and they got abusive at the finish like.  And one of them, I don\rquote 
t know what he was gonna do, so, of course by then I got really wound up you see because of the pressure of one thing and another.  I was over in the field side of building the wall, I jumped over and I says, "come on then if you think your careful" I do
n'\rquote  know what he said.  [mumble ] \'93If I were you I\rquote d just keep going your not gonna (inaudible) or anything\'94 [laugh].  I was really, and I thought well how bloody mis-under \'85\'85 you know they couldn\rquote 
t understand that there was a crisis like.  And I think, not getting at the town\rquote s people really because no, they don\rquote t understand it in all honesty they don\rquote 
t understand the hardships it has caused.  I mean, its maybe harsh to say, but I think they\rquote re living in a little world of their own in the towns.  I mean I don\rquote t know whether you\rquote re a country lad or a town lad?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 (inaudible)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 So you do understand it then, don\rquote 
t you?  But er, no I think er, I think they are very bigoted in some of the things that they were saying and I mean, the tourist industry was making such a (inaudible) they weren\rquote t hit as hard as the farmers.  I don\rquote 
t care what anybody says, I don\rquote t know what you think yourself?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Do you think there was a divide during the crisis to a certain extent?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah definitely.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 \'85
.you had small businesses who wanted to have foot paths opened.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 That\rquote s right. Er, I think being realistic they didn
\rquote t understand one another\rquote s position.  Some of the farmers were sort of connected with the tourist industry with the bed and breakfast and w
hat have you.  But you got these figures quoted, the tourist industry was losing X number of pounds per week.  Now the money that they were saying they were losing, a farmer couldn't even think about making it in a year and they were saying in months and 
weeks they were losing, well .\'85..  You know were they hit as hard as they say they were?  Yeah they were hit, there\rquote 
s no denying it but I mean there was one person in our house one night.  We went for a ride up the Lakes the other day and he says, \'93has tourist industry been hit?\'94  He says, \'93there was thousands out you know\'94
.  I mean all right they probably weren\rquote t staying in hotels or what have you, but they were still gonna be bringing revenue into the area, you know, buying bar meals or going into cafes for snacks and what have you.  No I don\rquote 
t honestly, I may be wrong, I mean I may get shot down in flames if somebody heard me say but I don\rquote t honestly think that tourist industry was hit as hard as it was trying to make Joe-Public think it was.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 Do you think. .. .?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Definitely, definitely.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 In what way?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
I mean we have a man in this village who is, who he is in the animal feed business himself.  He had er, livestock and what have you, I mean that was shut down.  Yeah, now that side of the business it did affe
ct but it has affected his cattle feed business but I mean I think it\rquote 
s hitting him harder now than it actually was at the time.  And then he got himself a trailer well he got two cattle trailer things to pull behind his, he has two four wheel drive vehicl
es to pull behind them and he was going round (inaudible) picking up not the culled sheep, the culled lambs.  And I mean, I think that possibly I know if I\rquote 
d been a farmer it would be the last piece of cattle food that I bought off him for what he did.  All right everybody\rquote s got to diversify and try and make a living but the businesses he was in, I think he\rquote 
d have been better off keeping out of that side of it.  You know, I do know that there\rquote s a lot of farmers who have commented on what he was doing and th
ought he was wrong and I think he was wrong.  Er, we have another farmer, farm in the village that I mentioned before, he had just sold some land.  The friend that I was on about that had the Leicester sheep he had bought some and his just farming for a h
obby by the way, cause he has a wagon that leads for a feed firm.  Er, his sort of farming for a hobby in a sense and I mean, but there again, you still try to make a penny or two at the same time don\rquote 
t you?  And I mean he was doing very nicely out of his Leicester\rquote s.  And I know for a fact he did very nicely out of his compensation but that doesn\rquote t give him his Leicesters back, they\rquote ve been blood stock for years, does it?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 No
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
And he bought some land off him.  There was another farmer over the top of the vi
llage was in the throes of buying some land off him and he cancelled it, it cost this farmer a hell of a lot of money because of Foot & Mouth.  He never got Foot & Mouth, he has another farm at L and he used to come in every day, he would change his cloth
e
s two or three times a day.  Because when he went down to the other farm where his son was on, he would go with a clean set of clothes on.  And his vehicle, his vehicle that he was travelling back and forward with, never actually went into his proper farm
 
yard for months it stopped outside.  And it lost him quite a pack or two in the deal of selling the land.  Now fortunately the other lad, me friend, that did buy some off him, they had some land, he had some land on one side of the road, both of them had 
land on both sides of the road if you get what I mean.  And they got their heads together and said, \'93well to save fetching live stock over the road, you use my fields on that side of the road and I\rquote ll use your fields on this side of the\'94 \'85
\'85 and we got over it that way.  Er, as I say I helped him quite a bit we made more crop, put more grass and that into big bale silage and hay than he would have done normally.  But for the simple reason he hadn\rquote 
t the livestock there to eat with, er he hadn\rquote t been able to stock his \'85\'85 Well he has suppliers and what have you, I mean, he couldn\rquote 
t bring any more of them in because h e was restricted with the Foot & Mouth and all his sheep had gone, they weren\rquote t to feed, they weren\rquote t taking the grass off the fields.  So we croppe
d a lot more fields than would have happened.  I mean, he is now reaping the benefit as far as that goes because, well he took a load of hay away to a friend of his yesterday and she is wanting another two loads off him.  And you know its hay that he woul
dn\rquote t have to spare normally so I mean yeah its an ill wind that blows nobody any (inaudible) in that sense.  But having said that the farmer at the other side of the road with him having the two farms he couldn\rquote 
t move his live stock about at the other farm in the way he would have liked to have done.  So his eating a lot of his winter fodder up you know, his gonna suffer.  And I mean they\rquote ll be a like more like it, bound to be.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Can you see things getting back to normal?

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Not for a long time yet, I don\rquote t thi
nk so anyway.  I mean, yeah things yeah your starting to go about and you are seeing live stock in fields.  I mean for such a long time there was bare fields wherever you looked type of thing. And then you\rquote d go out of the area and you\rquote 
d come back, \'93guess what I\rquote ve seen today I\rquote ve seen some live stock in a field\'94 you know it was a novelty to see them.  And I mean you must have been the same.  That yeah there\rquote 
s live stock getting into fields and that again now, sheep.  I mean, we\rquote ve always been able to look o
ut of my back yard there into that field and look, well me mate nearly always had a few Leicesters in that field there is nothing.  But I mean, his starting to stock up with sheep again but he says, \'93he\rquote ll never go back into Leicesters\'94
 his going into these Welsh (inaudible) and er, I looked out the other day and sure enough there\rquote s some in behind me, you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 That must be good to see them?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Oh yeah, yeah.  But er, I mean the farmer\rquote 
s just starting to come back into milk.  But there again it\rquote s the same scenario as when they went out, they\rquote ve got (inaudible) herds and they\rquote 
ve got to be picked up last on their own, so your juggling farms about again you know.  But it possibly isn\rquote t as difficult as it was when they were going out mind, because you had to be very careful how you, what area\rquote 
s  you were in and what have you.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
How can you see your business changing over the next few months?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Oh its bound to do.   I mean, well its gonna be difficult because our er, our vehicles I think possibly got depleted as to what we were using, oh well we\rquote re not using them, we don\rquote t need that vehicle.  And they\rquote 
ve probably got pensioned off type of thing, I mean some of them were past pensioning off anyway like, it was a good thing to see some of them go.  But now the milks coming back yeah, there\rquote 
s new vehicles ordered I mean they were in the programme before the Foot & Mouth started.  But unfortunately they are not there.  And now we need some vehicles to pick up more milk than what we have been doing all winter type of
 thing because of farms coming back.  They just aint there.  You know, and I mean, before the Foot & Mouth started you had lads going out picking up three loads in a day, depending on where it was going to, of course.  And so that was knocked back to two 
loads a day and they were struggling to do two loads a day. Because I mean you\rquote 
ve got to appreciate you had to disinfect at each farm before you got there, pick the milk up, you disinfected before you went into the dairy to connect onto the tank.  And then 
you disinfected before you left the farm, and then you disinfected at the lane end again.  You know I mean it was putting well a good half hour on each collection.  And by the end of the day if you had, well if you had ten farms to pick up, you\rquote 
ve added five hours onto your day\rquote s duty haven\rquote t you?  Er, I mean, yeah we got through it for the simple reason, there was getting less and less farms so we were able to do it, you know.  I mean, well I don\rquote 
t know how many we had it counted up how many farms we\rquote d lost in our depot at one stage, it was absolutely colossal I just can\rquote t remember off hand what it was.  I mean, I\rquote ll have a look one of these days and check up on it again and I
\rquote ll probably tell you what it was.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It would be interesting to find out.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 But I mean, I don\rquote t think I\rquote 
m exaggerating we lost half a million litres, we lose up to half a million litres a day you know.  I mean, not in one foul swoop but over the you know, we lost over half a million litres a day, that\rquote s a lot of milk like.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 And what about
 your business, that must have been\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Well I suppose in a sense it helped them to become more competitive because there wasn\rquote t the milk in the country.  Er, help them to become more competitive through somebody\rquote s downfall.  But er, it got to the stage wher
e there was more milk coming back into the country than people realised there was gonna be.  For the simple reason people were maybe, cows that they would have culled out of their herd naturally they weren\rquote t able to because they couldn\rquote 
t shift live stock. 
 They were probably serving them with, well if they had a beef bull on the (inaudible) I mean as you heard the other night there I mean, that girl from the (inaudible) set up they just stopped going.  Well I mean unless you had a commercial bull on your p
remises or you had a dairy bull, I mean, depending how big a set up you had, you hadn\rquote t anything to serve your cows with like, had you?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 No.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 And they were probably serving them with a beef bull er just, 
\'93well I can\rquote t get shot of this cow I \lquote m gonna keep it, I may as well keep it going\'94
.  A cow that would have gone gelled or something, you know, and I mean, they were milking them so there was more milk coming from the farms that were staying in that what would have been normally.  We found that anyway, I mea
n, there were lots of farms that we felt, well you never produced as much milk as this last year you know.  But when you stopped to think about it that was the reason they were keeping.  And I mean that was helping to deplete the fodder as well like.  And
 I mean, well there was farms that had sheep taken on for winter and what have you and couldn\rquote 
t get shot of them back to their owners when the spring came, they were having to feed them and things like that.  I mean, I know of one farmer that had some heifers taken in from another farm for winter, they started carving well he couldn\rquote 
t send them back, so he moved them himself which was milk that he wouldn\rquote t have normally had you know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 So has the situation changed since then?

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It\rquote s changed a lot and I mean I 
can see drastic changes in farming through this I honestly think there will be.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 What do you think is the way forward?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 I don\rquote 
t honestly know.  But I think a lot of farmers were just plodding on just making a little bit possibly on rented farms, they\rquote ve ju
st been struggling to make ends meet and what have you, rents have kept going up and going up every sort of two or three years and they thought well, I mean you\rquote ve got a lot of sons, there\rquote s yourself for instance,  you\rquote 
ve come out of farming haven\rquote t yer?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 I\rquote m out of farming yeah.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid7421093 But you\rquote ve come off it haven\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Oh yes.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 You know,  and I mean, I think you\rquote 
ve got a lot of farmers sons today the interest isn\rquote t there the same as it used to be. And this is possibly, it\rquote s a hard thing to say probably, but this has given a lot of farmers who were on rented tenanted farms their sons hasn\rquote 
t had their hearts in it.  And said, \'93well here\rquote s a golden opportunity to get out of this, get me debts squared up and have a fresh start\'94.  And a lot of them on these tenanted farms they\rquote ve been old fellas because they\rquote 
ve farmed and farmed and farmed, they\rquote ve nothing else and not known how to get out when they should have got out and this has given them the opportunity.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 What\rquote s the average 
age of farmers now, around 58? 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Well that\rquote 
s right yeah you know and I mean, I think possibly it has also I mean, first of all when they were ringing you up and saying they\rquote d got Foot & Mouth they were saying, \'93but don\rquote t worry I\rquote ll be back, I\rquote ll be back\'94. 
 And then a lot of them had time to think because nobody ever thought this was going to go on as long as it did.  And a lot of thems had time to think and I think they\rquote ve thought and said, \'93well I\rquote m not gonna do what I did before, I
\rquote m gonna modernise me buildings go into beef\'94.  Or possibly, well I don\rquote 
t know that a lot of them will be that keen on sheep after.  I mean sheep got the blame for it, but who knows.  Sheep was blamed for spreading it around the country like more than anything else but I don\rquote t kn
ow really what was the main thing to blame for it.  But a lot of them possibly they sort of had a mixed farm and they said, no they\rquote re talking now \'93we\rquote re going to go more into dairy\'94.  Others are gonna, \'93
well no why should I have seven days a week its milking seven days a week\'94 and they\rquote 
ll go into beef.  But I mean, yeah its stills seven days a week but a damn site easier seven days a week type of thing, you can sort of switch off at the weekend like well you can\rquote t with milk, can you?  And I think your gonn
a get a lot of this and possibly going back to the tourist industry, maybe get a lot of your small tenanted farms in the Lake District and what have you.  And possibly down The Lune Valley and where have you, they\rquote re gonna say, \'93
well if there was that much money made out of the tourist industry why don\rquote t I have a go at it?\'94  And I think you\rquote ll find that.  I maybe wrong but I think I\rquote ll be right.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Did any of the farmers blame you for spreading FMD, did you come across any?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 I only heard it once, well I didn\rquote 
t actually hear it meself but I heard it second hand and the driver that heard it, he had to walk away because he says, \'93I would have said something that I shouldn\rquote t have said\'94 and he was in Safeway.  And he heard one farmer\rquote 
s wife talk to another and she actually said the milk cattle brought it to us.  Now there is no proof in it.  I\rquote d like to see the proof because I think I, like many others would really like to know where it came from.  And I don\rquote t think we
\rquote ll ever know because I don\rquote t think the government is prepared to make a public inquiry into it, all sorts of inquiries will happen but they\rquote 
ll not be a public inquiry.  Because I think if the truth came out there would be too many heads to roll that\rquote s my opinion anyway, I may be wrong.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It\rquote s obviously 
been a very stressful time for you.  How did you get through?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Just talking to people I think you know.  I mean, able to talk to people you knew that had had it and people that hadn\rquote t had it and er, I think possibly having a lot of friends in the farming w
orld, we were able to understand one another.  I mean we had lads at work, yeah, they\rquote d been, I mean some of the lads had been well there\rquote s three or four of us at Penrith Depot.  We\rquote 
ve all sort of been there as long as one another and then we\rquote ve had some of t\rquote others that hasn\rquote t been there so long, no they didn\rquote t fully understand it you know.  And then there was other drivers \'93
oh well if my next door neighbour gets it, I live right next to a farm, will I be able to come to work?\'94  Obviously worried about it 
you know, and rightly so.  But what kept us going?  Well as I say, difficult to put something on what did keep you going other than saying, \'93well I\rquote d gone through the 1967 outbreak I remembered what happened then and yeah we got over it again
\'94.  I mean, people began to wonder if they were ever gonna get over that.  And I can also remember, I mean, well I don\rquote 
t know whether I am fortunate enough or unfortunate enough to be old enough to remember the outbreak before that as well which I mean, I was only a school kid at the time.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Was that \rquote 55?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Somewhere in that region yeah.  Er, I know I wasn\rquote 
t so old, I can\rquote t just remember how old, what age I was. I mean I was born in \rquote 41 so, no there must have been one previous to that, a small percentage of out-break.  Nev
er mind I can remember that and I know I went to me uncles at (inaudible) holidays and being a school kid me initial thought was, will I get back home again, you know you think.  But I suppose with living through them and remembering how people recovered 
from them again er, yeah you\rquote ve got that in the back of your mind you know, well hopefully you know its not gonna go on forever.  You sort of see, yeah there is a light at the end of the tunnel but when is it gonna come?  I know this time herd
\rquote s were a hell of a lot bigger than they were in \rquote 67.  Er, its probably the wrong thing to say but it might \'85\'85.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par END OF SIDE 1
\par 
\par \'85\'85..but I mean I don\rquote t think there\rquote s anyone of us can deny that er, the country was over-stocked.  I think you\rquote ll never see (inaudible ) make 
the same money again.  Now when people has had a chance to look back and look at things and think of themselves, well I was taking all this grass what the hell was I taking it for you know.  I think grass letting will it\rquote 
ll take enough for a few years anyway, definitely.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
What about your mates in  farming what do you think about them ?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Just being able to talk to one another I\rquote 
m sure of it, I mean, I know one of me mates he would ring me up at all times and likewise other farmers who would ring up and other farmers would ring him up.  I mean, I\rquote ve known him ringing me at 11 o\rquote 
clock at night, you know.  And I mean under normal circumstances what the bloody hell\rquote s up with you?  But no, it was, it just had to happen you know you felt as if you were helping one another through something.  Er \'85..
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Yeah.  I mean, a lot of people have used war time language, you know, that everyone pulls together.  Did you get that kind of feeling?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 That\rquote 
s right.  Everybody seemed to want to help one another in some way you know no matter how little it could be because I mean, obviously farmers were limited as to what they could do for one another other 
than talk to one another over the phone.  I mean, you had no options to go to, which is, I mean a lot of farmers never go to the auction to buy or sell anything, they go to have a crack with people, even if it might just be the next door neighbour type of
 thing.  I mean, that had gone it had gone out of their lives hadn\rquote t it?  And I mean even meself, I\rquote ve seen me on me days off go to the auction just for a look round and see some of the farmers that I\rquote 
ve met over the years, being on the tanker job you know, and never seen for a long time.  And think, oh I\rquote ll have away with the auction desk see if I can \'85\'85  Then you\rquote ll see somebody and think who the hell\rquote 
s that?  I know him but I \'85\'85  And then you get talking to him and suddenly it all clicks you know, but it wasn\rquote t there.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 And all the shows had gone as well hadn
\rquote t they?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 All the shows had gone yeah, they\rquote 
d all gone.  I mean, I er, I helped at Penrith.  I mean I\rquote m not on the committee but I helped out for a number of years as a steward to  (inaudible) the show, that wasn\rquote t there, it was gone out of me life.  You know I mean, I don\rquote 
t go to many shows.  I usually go to Penrith Show and possibly I like to go to the Highland Show, maybe not every year, but I maybe go every other year and I like Harrogate Show, the great Yorkshire Show as well.  You know, you didn\rquote 
t get to that.  And then I\rquote d always promised meself over a lot of years that I\rquote d go down to the dairy event at Stoneleigh it wasn\rquote t to be this time.  Well I tell a lie it was to be, they did it without any livestock didn\rquote 
t they?  Because we had a vehicle which had just been done up in the new livery and it was sort of a flag ship.  Which one of our lads picking milk up for another company all together up in Scotland and they wanted it down at the dairy event 
for the day as a flagship.  And er, I said, \'93well I\rquote d always wanted to go to the dairy event\'94.  Er all right it wasn\rquote t gonna be what normally it\rquote d been.  And I was having two or three days holiday and I said, \'93you know, I
\rquote ll take this vehicle down for yer\'94.  And I went down had a bit of picnic on the way, had a blow out and what have you but that\rquote 
s beside the point.  And I took it down on the conditions that they paid me water type of thing.  And er, for how the farming industry had been hit through the Foo
t & Mouth epidemic I thought that they did a really, really good job putting that dairy event on.  I don\rquote t know whether you were at it or not, were you?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 No I wasn\rquote t there.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 For what they put on and how they\rquote 
d done it and what have you and yeah I met a lot of farmers there that had gone, that had been hit with Foot & Mouth, it was a chance for them to go out and see the neighbours away from you know.  And er \'85\'85
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It must have been an important thing\'85

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah and it was grand to meet up with some of them, I rea
lly enjoyed me day you know, even though \'85..  Well, I\rquote 
ll tell you how difficult a day it was, shall I?  It was, as I said, I was having two or three days off and the vehicle was back in from picking its milk up and I washed it out and I had to take water down.  That was \'85
.. it was going down with water to feed a disinfecting booth where the cars and that, the vehicles and that was coming in.  But it had, you know, there was banners put on the side of it and what have you, it was a flagship for Milk (50) that\rquote 
s what it was.   So it was loaded with water, I was supposed to be picking it up at 6 o\rquote 
clock at night.  I was in the depot at half past 5 and I think I got away about half past 6.  Off I go down the motorway, I got to Tickle Trout beyond just as you are dropping down from Preston, I don\rquote 
t know whether you know it or not?  And the lads in with me, \'93where the hell is all that smoke coming from?\'94  I\rquote d burst a tyre on the trailer hadn\rquote t I?  So this was about quarter to 8 at night by then.  I got away from th
ere at a quarter to 11.  The tyre company that came out to me (inaudible) the wrong size of tyres.  Anyway I got away from there at about quarter to 11, no I was there 3\'bc hours that\rquote 
s how long I was there.  Got going, I got to just north of Birmingham, traffic was virtually at a standstill, I was watching the markers on the side of the motorway and I was moving approximately 100 yards every quarter of an hour.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah its always bad there.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 But that was at 2 o\rquote 
clock in t he morning.  I eventually got to Stone
leigh and I pulled in, I was told to go into Gate 2 so of course I shot into Gate 2, what was it?  The ruddy sewage works.  So I got meself out of there eventually and found where I wanted to be.  I parked up at 3 o\rquote 
clock in the morning and there was no, there was supposed to be someone there, they knew I was running late.  There was supposed to be someone there to see me onto the field and gate.  I gets down and there\rquote 
s these two ramps for vehicles going in and vehicles going out, well it wasn\rquote t wide enoug
h for a wagon to go through, so I had to straddle it.  Nobody there and it was built up in the middle and I was clearing it by that much on the vehicle, on the bottom of the wagon.  I had to keep getting out and looking with a torch to see whether I was c
learing it or not.  And I got in and I thought well, I don\rquote t care where you want me parked but I know where I\rquote 
m gonna park.  And I just slowed the wagon round, I parked it up, off with me clothes into me sleeping bag and I just laid down.  About 6 o\rquote clock i
n the morning bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, people starting to come in.  I thought the hell with you and I laid there [laugh].
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 You must have been knackered.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 But er, and then of course I mean, I eventually thought well I
\rquote d better get meself out and see wh
ere they wanted this vehicle set up.  And I did that and one of the bosses from Zenith came down to see me and gave me some money to go and get meself some breakfast what have you with.  And er, I left the show field again about half past 4 at night and I
 
was back home at half past 9, which was just a difference you know.  But that was virtually two days with about three hours sleeps you know.  But er, and you know as I say, as you went round the event everybody was aware of what damage the Foot & Mouth ha
d done but there was a camaraderie atmosphere of yeah we\rquote ve got to show on, we\rquote ve got something going, you know.  And you could see in everybody\rquote s face they felt they\rquote d made a success of what they tried to do.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Can you see anything good that\rquote 
s come out of the whole Foot & Mouth crisis?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Phew, I mean, can you see anything good that\rquote 
s come out of it?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Well people have said things like its brought the community together.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 It\rquote 
s brought the community together but how long will it last, how long will it stay in people\rquote s minds?  I mean, yeah the likes of you and I, and some of the farmers\rquote ll remember it and stick together.  On the other hand it\rquote 
ll have split some farmers you know, because some of them will have heard what compensation that they\rquote ve got, and possibly rightly so with pedigree herds and what have you and your ordinary commercial herd, we know it isn\rquote 
t worth as much as a pedigree herd.  And building up some of these pedigree herds cost a hell of a lot of money and I think yeah some communit
ies, some farming communities in small villages, small areas, will have possibly been split by that happening.  I mean, I heard of one farmer he got Foot & Mouth and went out and bought himself a flash car and his neighbours weren\rquote 
t suited about it.  I mean, I think they\rquote 
ve got over it now but things like that.  I mean, possibly wont stick in the farming communities crop the same as what well what was ordinary Joe Public in the village and another farm in the village has got Foot & Mouth.  And he turns out 
with a lot of new tackle and what have you, rightly so he maybe needed them before but couldn\rquote 
t see his way for er, for making the capital to do it.  His got the opportunity through Foot & Mouth compensation to do possibly some of the things on his farm which they couldn\rquote t do before but Joe Public out of the same community can\rquote 
t understand this, can they?  This is my feeling anyway.  Er, possibly jealous, jealous that the farmers been able to make a bob or two out of a catastrophe.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Mmmmm, some people say t
hat they think the public understand more about farming now.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Oh yes.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Other people say they don\rquote t think that\rquote 
s the case.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Er some of the public.  I think its brought it home to possibly some of the people who lives in the towns and what have you.  Not the
 big cities, but the towns, the likes of shall we say, Penrith, Kendal, Lancaster, maybe even down as far as Blackpool or Carlisle or Hexham or even Newcastle.  I think yeah it\rquote s brought it home to them.  But I don\rquote t think, I honestly don
\rquote t think it\rquote s brought it home to the people in the bigger parts of the world sort of like Birmingham, London, and places like that.  I don't think they have appreciated what really has happened.  I may be wrong I don\rquote t know.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Right, what was the worst part about it for you?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
Ooooh hell.  One of the worst things for us I mean, I could come downstairs of a morning look through me landing window half way down the stairs and I would look straight on to a pyre.  I\rquote 
d walk out of the house to open the garage door, I was looking this way sort of, well north-east type of thing out of me landing window I was looking onto a pyre.  I\rquote 
d get outside to go and open me garage door and I would look sort of where your car\rquote s parked, look that way, I was looking onto another pyre you know.  Things like that really er, and then I\rquote d go over to me daughter\rquote 
s at Lazonby to visit her.  And poor kid, I mean, she has a young family and looking out of their front window, even looking out of the bedroom window, they couldn\rquote t look anywhere else but straigh
t onto a pyre on one of the first farms that got Foot & Mouth in this area.  You know things like that it hits home when you see that happening.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah, it must be distressing.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
And another thing was one night we were going down to visit some friends at er, Carlisle, I just can\rquote t think what it was now, whether it was going to see somebody in The Infirmary, what it was.  And they were on slaughtering livestock on the road 
\'85\'85 at a farm on the roadside.  Er, and it brought a lump in my throat it really upset the wife.  I mean unfortunately we had to slow down because they were spraying the road and we had to stop and the wife says, \'93
oh no how long are we gonna have to sit here?\'94  Now when we came back she says, \'93don\rquote t go back the same way\'94, she says \'93in case they are still on\'94.  I said, \'93don\rquote t worry they\rquote ll be finished now\'94
.  And they were just finishing spraying the road.  But I mean we weren\rquote t held up that time.  Things like that it really you know.  I think them were some of the worst moments other than when some of me closest friend\rquote 
s and family friends and members of the family went down with it, you know.  I think \'85\'85. And then of course you see pictures on the television er, yeah you switch it on you wanted to see it but you didn\rquote t want to see it, did yer?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 
I guess in the eyes of the public, or some of the public at least, they probably think that the whole crisis has finished now.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Yeah I think they honestly do yeah.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 What would you say to them?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 No way has it finished.  I mean it wouldn\rquote 
t surprise me in the least if it raised its ugly head again come spring.  I mean, you\rquote ve got your sheep coming in that was  fortunate enough not to be culled or get Foot & Mouth, you\rquote 
ve got them coming in, who may still have antibodies on them, comes lambing time it\rquote s a whole lot of stress onto a ewe \lquote 
int it may trigger it off again.  You know, it just brings the resistance down that little bit and if the germs there, as we know how susceptible sheep seems to be to it, it wouldn\rquote t surprise me at all if it reared its ugly head again.  I hope I
\rquote m wrong.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Is there anything I haven\rquote 
t asked you, that you think is important?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 Wheeeew argh probably shouldn\rquote t, go on I\rquote 
ll say it.  I do honestly think there\rquote s been a lot of money unnecessarily spent er, with these hangers-on as I call them, people who\rquote ve been helping Defra.  And on the cleansing side and that, I don\rquote 
t honestly think they should ever have been offering such exorbitant fees.  I mean, don\rquote t get me wrong I\rquote m not in one way against any of the compensations t
hat has been paid to the farmers because I think they deserved every penny of it.  But I am against the way some of these cleaning gangs have been paid, the exorbitant fees that they\rquote 
ve been handed out.  Er, I mean some of the farmers themselves have made 
a tiny packet out of it.  I mean me son-in-law works on an estate, he only paid, he cleaned it up with his own staff but he only paid them the same rate of pay as they would have got normally.  But he was claiming the Ministry rate of pay, I mean he would
 make a tiny packet out of that.  But that\rquote s up to him but I still don\rquote 
t think the likes of these field officers and what have you should have been getting paid the exorbitant fees that they have been getting paid.  I think that money could have been put to a better use I honestly do.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7421093 OK, thanks a lot for your time.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid7421093 
\par 
\par 
\par }}