{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f46\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f49\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f50\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f52\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f53\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext17 Body Text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid2253204 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid490831\rsid1966186\rsid2253204\rsid3812077\rsid4071148\rsid15222492}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy12\hr16\min12}{\version3}{\edmins0}{\nofpages6}{\nofwords2314}{\nofchars13190}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws15474}
{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1797\margr1797 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot2253204 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid490831 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid490831 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid490831 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid490831 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\f0\fs20\insrsid3812077 Lancaster University
\par }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Diary ID:       PM 42}{\insrsid2253204 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid2253204 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs20\insrsid2253204 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid4071148 1}}}{\cs20\insrsid2253204 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid2253204 {\insrsid2253204 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 
\par }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid2253204 Information about diarist
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 Date of birth: 1947
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 2}{\cs18\f0\fs24\super\insrsid2253204 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs18\f0\fs20\super\insrsid2253204 \chftn }{
\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204  }{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Group 1 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2253204 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.
\par }}}{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid2253204 WEEK  1        
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 Monday 28/1/02-Average day, very windy and wet. Another shop turning into 
\par antiques. Learn Cumbria CC}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492  (County Council)}{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204  is being given \'a325m to turn county \'93broad band\'94. If true good for future. Talked to holiday operator who lost great deal of money \endash 
 no compensation.
\par Tuesday-FMD enquiry report \endash  says nothing really, most people want a public 
\par enquiry. Meeting with J. Rambled on too long as usual.
\par Wednesday-Walking festival meeting. Had to cancel because of closed paths but 
\par now decide to have a one day affair in June
\par Friday-Health Centre for Op, postpone but read terrible article in AGA(?) magazine 
\par about \'93Long QT\'94
\par Saturday-Work again. Find it very tiring for no reason other than stress. Good night 
\par out at Rattan and Rush, live music in Kirkby Stephen with a meal \endash  Excellent (end of 
\par ad)
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid2253204 Week 2 No entries
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid2253204 WEEK  3
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 Friday    15th Feb Local papers carry articles about the forthcoming 
\par agricultural shows- no sheep/cattle/pigs/goats allowed
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 WEEK 4        
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 Monday 18th Feb-Half term holiday lots of visitors many still surprised by signs of 
\par ongoing FMD
\par Tuesday-Today is the first anniversary of FMD! 
\par DEFRA have warned farms locally that they are on high alert for a repeat 
\par performance during lambing.
\par Wednesday-Another local case of FMD antibodies in a local sheep (culled) what a 
\par bring down
\par Friday-Wake up and open curtains to find \'93boiler suits\'94 being donned for 
\par neighbouring farm is this the start of it again!
\par Saturday-Dine with local farmer who has not seen the \'93vets\'94 but thinks it could be 
\par increased testing with the few cases discovered of antibodies locally
\par Suspected outbreak at Thirsk (Hawnby)
\par 
\par The triangle of Farmers/DEFRA/Visitors still leads to confrontation. Have had visitors 
\par complaining that paths are closed due to re-stocking. But when check with access 
\par line am told that this is not legal. Farmers say it\rquote s on DEFRA advice somebody needs 
\par really to get a grip on this.
\par The much-publicised FMD outbreak (suspected) in the Thirsk area leads to a 
\par depressed holiday market with hoteliers talking of Easter cancellations. Visitors are 
\par contemplating another bad year and photography seems to be coming out of a slump 
\par in that quotes are increasing though no jobs are coming from them at the moment. 
\par With some clients being re-equipped by business link grants I will need to re-equip to 
\par stay in the game but the investment needs careful planning.
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492 
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 Week 5
\par Hasn't rained for over two weeks in serious way, this lovely spring weather certainly 
\par helps! I can ignore the macho management style at work now but why do "they" feel 
\par it necessary to bully. I wonder where all humility went, the world seems to be full of 
\par whiz-kids who only know the textbook but have no sense! (hey I'm getting old!)
\par 
\par Week 6
\par A little more "action" on the photographic front with a few quotes in the pipeline (four 
\par for different designers for the same work!) nobody seems to have time any more to 
\par talk jobs through, just want a figure plucked out of thin air.
\par Visitors to the TIC still well down and some still quite "damaged" from FMD, while 
\par others from city areas think it was all over in a couple of weeks!
\par As usual lots of future plans to spend FMD money from various agencies who in the 
\par main are just securing their own futures!
\par 
\par Week 7
\par Not many changes this week but looking forward to a few days in Suffolk next week.
\par Seem to be at complete odds with "management" at work who introduce paper 
\par pushing as an Olympic sport. Too much time is now spend on "non - core" work.
\par This spring/summer weather has made a welcome appearance and has enabled 
\par start on one or two photo jobs delayed by the rain.
\par Many strange animals can now be seen with re-stocking - herdwicks in the Eden 
\par Valley, alpacas, horses.
\par 
\par Week 8
\par A few days away with very good friends in Suffolk reminds me what a poor, 
\par disadvantaged area Cumbria is. Very let down by its councils, and central 
\par government.
\par I am surprised by the amount of visible "foot and mouth" warnings in Suffolk/Norfolk 
\par most seem to have quietly vanished from Cumbria but are still larger than life in 
\par Suffolk, though no disease.
\par I had been surprised to by the sharp increase in property prices in Cumbria though 
\par they have a long way to go to reach even the prices in Suffolk (am shown a small 
\par two-up two-down terraced cottage in Southwold with a good position but no sea view 
\par and no extending possibility \'a3500,000!) . With the new prices in Cumbria wages must 
\par raise fairly drastically to compete with FMD "compensation" and we only have as 
\par single reply for part-time TIC assistant as ours/or wages are bad (before we have 
\par had 80+). MAFF showed the light paying around \'a39 per hour so look out for a "sea-
\par change".
\par 
\par Week 9
\par Back to work, not enough hours to accomplish all its needed - always seem to be at 
\par loggerheads with TIC management and fighting the technology, but a little bird says 
\par new person to head IT department so perhaps some improvements may happen.
\par Tourism is having a shake-up in most councils in Cumbria with reorganisations and 
\par redundancies whilst new marketing groups etc take over traditional roles with new 
\par grants (FMD, Europe, north-west etc). many good people out on their ears while the 
\par new turks take over!
\par Photography is still down, a few regular clients are cutting back and the jobs created 
\par by Business Link seemed to have come to an end. (and equipping companies with IT 
\par grants means many are doing the work ( poorly!) in house.)
\par 
\par Week 10
\par Another summer has begun many more people about in TIC}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492  (Tourist Information Centre) }{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 
 but actually they are increasingly busy, numbers on the counter (tally) day by day on not showing much improvement on last year's (3000 plus down on average).
\par Appleby Fair brought what was to be a record number of gypsies but in the end it 
\par petered out with bad weather poor trading and a lot of illness among travellers - so 
\par I'm told.
\par One set of camera equipment finally gave up the ghost and needs replacing, the 
\par trouble is do I replace with old traditional equipment for \'a33,000 which has perhaps no 
\par future or go digital in a bigger way (\'a312,000) with a possible life span of two/three 
\par years. We have to wait a few months for newly announced models before making the 
\par wrong decision!
\par \'a33 ticket on Settle  - Carlisle line for locals has meant several trips to Leeds and 
\par environs and am amazed at how many shops etc have closed from last year's visit 
\par and wonder if this is due to FMD with lack of us country folk visiting and spending.
\par Photograph two hotels who changed hands at the beginning of last year and had no 
\par income but seem amazingly buoyant about future prospects even though hardly any 
\par improvement in trade so far.
\par 
\par Week 11 No entries
\par 
\par Week 12
\par To Sedbergh to do a hotel with new chef and food shots, once photographed the staff 
\par (part-time girls) are given a taste and talk about the dishes, which are super looking 
\par but being a local they don't like messed about foreign food - still living in the dark 
\par ages!
\par Still a few farmers having go at the TIC for "sending" people on to their land. But 
\par times should have changed for them but things do seem to be slipping back to the 
\par "old ways" not sure they can be sustained in future. (though a lot of local farmers 
\par have been more cautious about re-entering the trade).
\par Sheep are making a comeback as icons lately! Have been asked for a few photos 
\par with them, and the sand sculpture weekend of a flock of sheep in Kirkby Stephen is 
\par mooted for the summer!
\par Received a w}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492 a}{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 dge of paperwork from the Countryside Agency to "express an 
\par interest" in (only) tendering for some photo-shoots, the sheer bureaucracy is 
\par ridiculous (Enclose a CV just to be able to be invited to quote!) am seething as the 
\par amount of work for an "expression" is around five evenings (at least 30 hours) the 
\par world is nuts.
\par 
\par Week 13
\par Hooray for Rattan and Rush (tea }{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492 r}{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 oom of Plus) in Kirkby Stephen, who once a 
\par month (+ -) put on a live music supper with some great musicians/performers. It is a 
\par gem and the couple, Paul and Penny, who organise it do a fantastic job. But though 
\par successful worry about lack of "locals". Anyway it is always very good and worth 
\par looking forward to.
\par My father who moved into sheltered accommodation up here 18 months ago from the 
\par south still has not settled, and it's a bit unnerving seeing him every day from three or 
\par four times a year and watched him get old and not realise it - he loves the sea and 
\par have stuck him in the middle of the country (and he's a born townie!).
\par Still worried by lack of visitors to the area but see Majorca is complaining about a 
\par 40% drop (but they blame  the \'801 bed tax (60 p!)). Surprisingly quite a few Americans 
\par about who seemed concerned for us regarding the hoof and mouth, TB in cattle, the 
\par BSE in chickens (do we have to put beef protein in chicken?)
\par Welsh farmer and wife very distraught by F and M when in TIC as "TB" restrictions in 
\par their area are bringing it all back I suppose.
\par 
\par Next 4 diaries collected Thursday 24th October 2002
\par Week 32 Sept
\par Late summer is a bonus but visitors are down in numbers. Foot and mouth scares 
\par again don't help and farmers not following the new (possibly over-the-top) regulations 
\par are making some people annoyed.
\par The horse sales did well "horsey}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15222492  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid2253204 culture" being the new growth area.
\par Pupil on work experience seems very confident and able and willing to tackle most 
\par jobs including talking to the public (a new development!) and certainly brings some 
\par cheer into a very quiet TIC.
\par 
\par Week 33 Sept
\par Oh dear, New "IT" opportunities for E - business seem very Big Brother with 
\par databases gathering information and also interacting locally. (do you want your 
\par mobile phone to tell you what to do, where to stay, where to eat  etc)
\par The main trouble seems to be the people in charge of the new technologies are a) 
\par humourless corporate faces and b) can't work it probably anyway (probably the 
\par saving grace!)
\par Colleague at work is leaving to do a post grad at Lancaster and comes in after the 
\par first few days fairly shell-shocked at the commercial/foreign element that university is 
\par now.
\par 
\par Week 34(Oct 02)
\par Start of a holiday.
\par And time for one to!
\par The "Eden Project" is very interesting and looks to have kick-started a large slice of 
\par the local economy. Though Devon seems to be moving up Cornwall, away from the 
\par coast, is looking very poor and down-at-heel. A lot of Cornish home rule about, but 
\par do they resent visitors to the Eden Project which even in late October is very busy. 
\par The gift shop quite full of local made items. Many galleries and craft shops 
\par throughout Devon and Cornwall, how do they all make a living? Farming looks quite 
\par small-scale the though very "niched" marketing of rare breeds etc
\par 
\par Week 35  (Oct 02)
\par Second week of the holiday and his most refreshing. The Isles of Scilly are most 
\par relaxing (though underneath the tranquillity there appears to be the dead hand of 
\par Charles/Duchy of Cornwall. Is this the way forward? More research I think).
\par Returning to "the mainland" traffic is most noticeable - our lives might be greatly 
\par improved without it. Is "local" the answer?
\par This raises a lot of questions 
\par (respondent attaches newspaper story headlined pedigree ram is sold for a record 
\par \'a3101,000 dated 22nd October 2002. Story about an 18 month old Swaledale ram 
\par said to be Britain's first six-figure ram, sold at auction at Kirkby Stephen)
\par 
\par Week 36 Nov 1
\par Busy week at TIC. How come there is never enough time to start/finish things, 10 
\par hours isn\rquote t enough!
\par The walking festival seems to be taking shape for next year, I\rquote m always amazed at 
\par the energy of some people, how do they fit it all in? Several photographic clients of 
\par clients have not paid their bills (though luckily I have been paid), seems to be hotels 
\par mainly.
\par Another postcard producer has just upped his loss from \'a37000 to nearer \'a320,000 for 
\par last year (2001) \endash  it\rquote s come as a surprise and too late to claim anything.!
\par My father seems to be ageing faster now- it\rquote s difficult living close and watching it 
\par happen. (selfish me!)
\par 
\par Week 37 (Nov 7 02)
\par What an average week
\par Time for the St John\rquote s Wort methinks!
\par Surveyors at the TIC were supposed to be doing a structural survey but it looks like a 
\par valuation to me. God help us if it was structural, 4 of them acting like clowns! Didn\rquote t 
\par even look in the cellar.
\par Finding other people increasingly irritating. Partly down to short TIC hours but too 
\par much work. And a newish member of staff who lacks in-depth training, roll on Easter.
\par 
\par Week 38 (Nov 14/02)
\par Can\rquote t really get it together, lots of things to look forward to yet not much pleasure in 
\par them.
\par Just go through the motions though a couple of \'93music evenings\'94 were enjoyable.
\par Have to sell cars as new one on the way, seems a daunting task and a waste of time 
\par for little return.
\par 
\par Week 39 (Nov 21 /02
\par New car is finally on the horizon but can\rquote t shift me old\rquote uns. Have a few time-wasters 
\par around but eventually put Mercedes G Wagon in a 4X4 sale in Carlisle (if you haven\rquote t 
\par been to an auction try not to if selling!) ends up not selling as below the reserve bid 
\par then sells next day at car auction. You always think your car is worth more but very 
\par cheap prices at auction good for selling no doubt.
\par Saab gets swapped for a new bike! Anyway gets them out of the way.
\par It\rquote s funny with new camera equipment and new car one would expect to be \'93happier\'94 
\par but don\rquote t feel much \endash  old age creeping on or depression?
\par 
\par Week 40 (Dec 1)
\par Have been awarded to 12 months contracts for the Countryside Agency for 
\par photography after an enormous amount of tendering. The bureaucracy in this country 
\par is going far too much overboard nowadays. Seem to meet quite a few people who 
\par are withdrawing from the world that is "normal" and ploughing their own furrow. The 
\par supposed widening of choice and empowering people seems to me to be backfiring 
\par and become a sort of bullying.
\par Another 3 staff questionnaires this week including the annual communication one 
\par (they never addressed the issues in last year's) What is the point? Oh and we are to 
\par have six-monthly assessments now (again what for - it's just bullying!)
\par 
\par Week 41 (Dec7)
\par My father (90) has been ill twice this week and gone downhill the very fast (though 
\par getting better) can't easily watch him age without projecting my future.
\par Christmas seems to have started with lots of jollys on one level and war, no 
\par pensions, work till your 70+, on another, it seems the society I thought we had is 
\par breaking up. (Can\rquote t even get any Christmas stamps in the Post Office's 12 days 
\par before last posting date!) it's every man for himself now.
\par 
\par Week 42 (Dec 14)
\par My colleague at the TIC has had three deaths in four weeks on the road outside 
\par his home, can't help thinking I'd be even more depressed living there (one death a 
\par well-known local chap).
\par My father is surprised by number of Christmas cards he has had from down south 
\par where he used to live, he worries that he hasn't responded but he doesn't know 
\par names and addresses any more as he used to hand deliver.
\par He is a lot better this week though he's had very good health care, a local lady was 
\par taken by ambulance in the night to Kendal with pneumonia but they refused to admit 
\par her or deal with her so had to wait till morning in the A and E department till her 
\par husband could pick her up! Out-of-hours health service now has to go first to NHS 
\par Direct before they decide whether to contact Cue Doc. Another nail in society\rquote s coffin!
\par }}