{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid344844\rsid2441540
\rsid2975478\rsid4136037\rsid4850657\rsid5011890\rsid7804104\rsid8413785\rsid9045127\rsid9058216\rsid9335607\rsid9504655\rsid10030567\rsid10317771\rsid10515865\rsid10638796\rsid10754166\rsid11162017\rsid12539855\rsid13509669\rsid14056051\rsid14697079
\rsid14746380\rsid15217639\rsid15598529\rsid15604176\rsid16195328\rsid16659592}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min27}{\version25}{\edmins20}
{\nofpages18}{\nofwords8858}{\nofchars50492}{\*\company UKDA}{\nofcharsws59232}{\vern16391}}\paperw11909\paperh16834 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180
\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot14697079 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7804104 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7804104 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7804104 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid7804104 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linex0\headery706\footery706\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\fs20\insrsid2975478 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid14697079 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid2975478 
\par Diary ID:       PM03                                       \tab \tab \tab \tab 
\par }{\insrsid2975478 
\par 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs19\insrsid2975478 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid15598529 5}}}{\cs19\insrsid2975478 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid2975478 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid2975478 Information about diarist
\par }{\insrsid2975478 Date of birth: 1966
\par Gender: F
\par Occupation: Group 6}{\cs18\super\insrsid2975478 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs18\fs20\super\insrsid2975478 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid2975478  }{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Group 1 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid2975478 
\par }}}{\insrsid2975478 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
\par 
\par 
\par Diary 1
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Monday was the usual long hard grind. I accept that I have to put in 10 \endash 
 12 hours and I don\rquote t mind doing the work because it\rquote s not physically or mentally taxing but I do hate not having a lunch break, just that little bit of selfish time to site, have a cigarette, take the dogs down the river, see the horses\'85
whatever. I do resent that fact that }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  (one of the bosses) almost always gets a lunch }{\ul\insrsid2975478 hour}{\insrsid2975478 . }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478 
 (the other boss) has gone up tremendously in my opinion for the way that he gets on with the work. He starts early, finishes late, hates DERFA paperwork and rarely complains. It is definitely grinding them down because they work like
 that at least 4 days a week. It has been a huge advantage this last year being part-time at work. My days off obviously aren\rquote 
t my own as they used to be, but I do get away from the phone and the demands of clients. Some of our clients are very selfish and I hadn\rquote 
t noticed before. They seem to think they are the only ones that have hassles with DEFRA. I remember saying to one (complaining about problems with licensing) that he was lucky to have problems with only one licence. The first day that movement lic
enses came out we applied for 26 and received the explanatory notes from DEFRA on how to complete the paperwork 4 days later.
\par Anyway managed to do three final visits and complete most of the paperwork before 9pm. Kirkby Stephen was buzzing today \endash  the auct
ion reopened for a cattle sale. The main street was full of shiny farmers with fish and chips and the back lane was full of shiny (some new) Land Rovers and trailers (trailers mostly new).
\par In fact }{\insrsid10317771 MC}{\insrsid2975478  told me that as soon as he heard his bloods had come back clear (restocking) he washed and changed and went to the mart. He said it was the first time he had felt clean since the day they were infected 
\endash  he felt ok to go among other farmers. He surprised me because he is so easy going \endash  he takes all in his stride. But he still says FMD is not as terrible as testicular cancer \endash  and he\rquote s right.
\par }{\insrsid12539855 AD}{\insrsid2975478  was one of the other final visits \endash  he doesn\rquote t give a bugger about anything. Happy to become a flower power farmer \endash  he doesn\rquote 
t care much about his sheep as individuals, they are just numbers. Just as well because in the batch he bought from Wales the sheep have more legs than teeth \endash  I can\rquote t see them lasting long. Pissed off because I missed Bryan Adams concert in
 Newcastle \endash  couldn\rquote t finish in time to join the bus. The rest of the lassies had a brilliant time, and at least Tracey benefited from my ticket.
\par Had to go back in to work the next day to finish my DEFRA reports and fax them off. Went to playgroup to talk about pets. Took my dog (lurcher) and }{\insrsid10030567 [child}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote }{\insrsid10030567 s]}{\insrsid2975478 
 rabbit (dodgy combination). Very few of the kids seemed to have pets of their own. A lot of them referred to Granddad\rquote s dogs or Uncles cat. When I left college the pet population was increasing, what\rquote s going to happen in the next 15 years?

\par }{\insrsid10515865 [Sister]}{\insrsid2975478  phoned, worried about her horse, he has haematuria. I\rquote m worried that he has a tumour. I feel very far away and helpless when things like this happen even though she only lives in Yorkshire. I\rquote 
m sure I could help her whatever the outcome if we lived closer. In fact I think I miss my family more now than I ever have. I don\rquote t know if it\rquote s my age, or the thought that M}{\insrsid4136037  }{\insrsid2975478 is over 60, or that I didn
\rquote t see them much at all last year, or just because I have }{\insrsid4136037 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  now and can understand how mothers/families feel. I miss }{\insrsid4136037 [sisters]}{\insrsid2975478  but I still don\rquote t phone them much 
\endash  I always think they\rquote ll be busy. I can talk to Mam three or four times a week for half an hour at a time without thinking twice. She must get fed up hearing me go on an
d on about work etc, but she loves hearing all about every tiny detail of }{\insrsid344844 [son\rquote s]}{\insrsid2975478  antics and achievements.
\par Will broached the subject of a partnership again. I don\rquote t know what to think. It\rquote s the obvious thing to do and a few years ago I would have taken his hand off for even 10 or 20%. I\rquote 
m just not as excited about it as I should be. And what would change? Will I be better off? Will I be a better vet? Or will I spend too much time of figures and paperwork. Will I become \lquote more commercially aware\rquote ? Do I want t
o change? Can I be bothered with the extra hassle? They are ok, they have a career and a wife, I\rquote m trying to do both (sometimes badly).
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 2
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Monday\rquote s are shite! It starts off busy and gets worse \endash  why can\rquote 
t we do time management a bit better. It did look as if we might finish around 6.30 at one stage in the afternoon. Then I was called out to a calf. I didn\rquote t really need a visit at 6pm at night. }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  said, \lquote 
never mind, you\rquote ll be picking }{\insrsid5011890 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  up anyway (the childminder lives on the next door farm) - he hasn\rquote t got a clue! If I picked }{\insrsid5011890 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  up he would be at Ange\rquote 
s for about 8 hours \endash  I feel guilty enough that he\rquote s away for about 8 hours. }{\insrsid5011890 [Partner]}{\insrsid2975478  always picks him up about 5.30 and has to cope (which he does well) until I get home. But it\rquote 
s hard work for both of us after a full day at work, and }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  is usually knackered and ready for peace and quiet when he gets home \endash  not a tired hungry wee lad.
\par Anyway, I ended up having a farm tour that night. }{\insrsid14746380 [farmer]}{\insrsid2975478  was so proud of his new pedigree Belgian Blues and his new shed. He\rquote 
s been lucky to get most of his commercial stock from his father so he has an idea of their past history. He\rquote s a nice lad and he was producing some stunning beef calves before he was taken out, at least he\rquote s young enough to get going agai
n. He hasn\rquote t said much about loosing his stock so I haven\rquote t asked. I had a chat to his aunt one day and she was very upset, and that upsets me. I hate when people get emotional like that, I start filling up myself. 
\par I got back to find a sheep caesarean sti
ll to do. Waste of time. Premature lambs all born alive (3) and all dead before I finished stitching the uterus. And to put the tin hat on the day my assistant was the mother who prattled about nothing much all the way through the op. She does my head in,
 she is a century away from me in her outlook but I still come away feeling that I am the one who has got it all wrong. Maybe I should have dinner on the table and shirts ironed etc. I don\rquote t want to be like her though and I can\rquote 
t even sympathise with her even though they lost all their sheep. I\rquote m sure she must have taken it badly but I don\rquote t think she would ever let her feelings show in public \endash 
 something about the way she spoke suggested that she was forcing herself to put a brave face and look forward \endash  probably for her own son\rquote s sake.
\par Watched \lquote Rural Lives\rquote  again on Tuesday. }{\insrsid9504655 CR}{\insrsid2975478  came over well I though. I couldn\rquote t help but snigger when the slaughter team were discussing one of our clients \endash 
 she made the kids carry away the dead piglets after they\rquote d been slaughtered \endash  them team thought that was terrible but I knew the kids \endash 
 they all help on the farm, they know that their pigs go to kill, the family even started their own little slaughter house and cutting plant before FMD. I don\rquote t think those kids would be ho
rrified. Sad maybe. We all felt sad over the last year, sad for the healthy animals culled, more sad for the people caught up in the mess. One disease where the cure is worse! Mostly though I get angry when I hear or talk about FMD. I get angry because DE
FRA let us all down, the politicians got too closely involved, nothing happened fast enough. We didn\rquote 
t seem to be able to do anything. We knew very little and struggled to get reliable information. I still get wound up thinking about it all. We were marginalised by DEFRA. I felt as if it was us and the farmers versus DERFA \endash 
 not all three groups versus FMD. The rumours that abounded just magnified the feelings. We talked at length about FMD, DEFRA, etc. within the practice and with our clients but I could st
ill talk about it all day even now. So many things are unresolved. I have lost faith in DEFRA, especially since they changed their name, no A for agriculture now; and I\rquote m glad I have been ignorant of politics for so long \endash 
 there have been few shining lights in the government. I\rquote m heartily sick of authority interfering and regulating stuff that\rquote s going along quite nicely. Let them interfere with stuff that\rquote s doing harm \endash 
 bad farmers need a shake up, sheep dealers  need to think more about animal welfare but the way things are going the good guys that toe the line will end up following all the rules and regulations set up to sort out the bad guys \endash 
 and will they bother?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 3
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Possibly the best bit of the week was Sunday when I eventually (after 13 months) g
ot back on my horse. Only 15 minutes but it was nerve wracking. I thought she might just throw me off, and I was so tense (actually we both were) I felt as if I had forgotten how to ride. I stayed in the field thinking it would be safer but the other two 
horses were flying about to annoy us. I\rquote m so frustrated that I haven\rquote t been able to get her fit for the start of the endurance season. There\rquote s no way we\rquote d be able to go to the first ride at Ullswater, and there\rquote 
s only one other in Cumbria this year (due to FMD). Who would have thought that we would still be curtailed by FMD more than a year on? 
\par }{\insrsid9504655 (T}{\insrsid2975478 he young horse) was very interested in saddle and bridle so I put them on him and he was ok. At first he was frightened to move at all but then he realised it was 
ok. On Monday I had a strange request to go and hold an old pony for the knacker to shoot. The owner\rquote s just didn\rquote 
t want to be around. It was a lovely morning so I led her out for a bite of grass before he arrived. She could barely manage to breathe and swallow at the same time. I can\rquote 
t believe how the tumours have taken hold of her since the turn of the year. Mr A couldn\rquote t tell his wife the diagnosis initially because she hadn\rquote t got over losing the few pedigree sheep they had. It\rquote s taking some people a long
 time to get over the loss. I think it\rquote s easier to get over losing an animal if you have more than one \endash  it helps to keep you focussed on the living rather than the dead \endash  and farmers haven\rquote 
t been able to get restarted when they were ready to because of all the C & D requirements. Anyway, the knacker man told some good tales. There\rquote 
s been some nutters about shooting animals, some even had their guns taken off them. Poor lad was given a day\rquote s notice at the knackey and was part of a slaughter team after that 
so he was only paid his normal wage which the boss collected at the DEFRA rate for them all, it was good talking to him probably because I don\rquote t really know him. I didn\rquote t feel that I would upset him because he wasn\rquote 
t like a client who had lost animals. Sometimes it\rquote s hard to know what to say if people get upset; sometimes it\rquote s enough to listen.
\par One of the most awkward situations I found myself in was talking to a farmer who lost no stock but he was so depressed he started crying. The cows I had gone to see \lquote should have gone last year, then we wouldn\rquote t have had these problems
\rquote . He also has been unable to sell sheep so the farm was completely overstocked, overgrazed and had little silage left.
\par I couldn\rquote t understand why he was still overstocking when he could have sold sheep and cattle for restocking or for slaughter quite easily in the last few months. Maybe he just couldn\rquote t face the hassle of getting licences, or maybe he\rquote 
s just too far down to think straight. I usually mention that sort of thing to }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  and }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  because I think it\rquote s important that everyone in the practice knows what\rquote 
s happening, not just with out patients but also with our clients.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 4
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
I had the honour of completing the FINAL final visit today, and it was one of my neighbours in Soulby. No more surveillance visits!! Poor Lol couldn\rquote 
t find his DEFRA paperwork, and while he was looking through his files he found copies of his valuation report with all his old cows on \endash  I think it brought it all back. He\rquote s trying hard to move on, I could understand
 him being bitter since his whole (very good) milking herd was taken as a DC. I think he may have survived because the infection was half a mile away from his cows but the IP land joined. I watched them load all his cows into coal wagons on s Saturday aft
ernoon. In fact it was midnight when the last de-tox wagon left. How can they be clean if I can\rquote t even get my wellies clean in the dark?
\par How he\rquote s worrying about his new cows coming from Holland. He thinks it\rquote s a long way for them to travel but he can\rquote t wait for them to arrive \endash 
 unlike his wife who thinks that all this restocking is going too fast. I felt apprehensive too about a fortnight ago, but the feeling is subsiding. The day to day normality of work is returning. Sheep are permitted to visit the surger
y for treatment so we have had a much more normal March than we\rquote d had last year, even though there are still thousands of sheep missing from the practice.
\par Farmers are still bringing in lambs. The value of stock is obviously not their prime concern \endash  \lquote where there\rquote s life there\rquote s hope\rquote . We wouldn\rquote t see ewes or lambs at all if the cost of treatment versus the animal
\rquote s value was weighed. I was worried that we would have a flare up around lambing time. There\rquote s a chance that some of the fell sheep were exposed to FMD \endash  and there\rquote 
s a risk of virus recrudescence at times of stress, so I was thinking that if we made it through lambing then we\rquote d definitely be ok. The weather has cheered me up this week. Everybody smiles more when it\rquote s sunny. Its tempting to think my da
ys at home are holidays when the weathers so nice!!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 5
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
I forgot about April Fools Day for the first time ever. We were so busy at work, and it was more of a Bank Holiday than anything else. I do resent working Bank Holidays \endash  but Monday is my day to be on call. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478 
 did offer to do some of the day but he had a caesarean on a cow, a lambing at 1.30 am and another call at 6 am so he\rquote d be knackered enough \endash  and they pay me for a day\rquote s work so its only fair that I give a days work.
\par When the phone rang early Tuesday and I felt as if I\rquote d only been in bed 2 hours I was regretting not passing on the night duty \endash  a Belgian Blue calving \endash 
 CAESARIAN mentally checked my kit in the car while driving to KS. Definitely caesarean. They shouldn\rquote t breed from these cows until they\rquote re more mature. We\rquote re getting loads of bother with the new stock \endash 
 never mind its proper veterinary work. Anyway the heifer was a right bag. Started off lying down so I doped her but she got up after we got the calf out and then tried to lye down on the wound \endash 
 peritonitis to follow no doubt. I warned the farmer and we were all very calm about it \endash  maybe none of us were really awake!! So that made }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  late for work as he was left \lquote holding the baby\rquote 
 and I was well late setting off to see my sister }{\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478 . }{\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478  didn\rquote t mind and }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote 
s bosses said it was ok but I still felt guilty.
\par Had a great time at }{\insrsid8413785 [sister\rquote s]}{\insrsid2975478  \endash  did a bit of touristy stuff and found a really nice book for mam\rquote s birthday, by Mrs Herdie who used to holiday near home. Mam
 has a watercolour by her but this book is all wildflowers. }{\insrsid8413785 [Other sister]}{\insrsid2975478  phoned to say }{\insrsid8413785 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478  is worse. I think }{\insrsid8413785 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478 
 and I both wanted to go to Yorkshire when we heard how upset she was. }{\insrsid8413785 [Sisters]}{\insrsid2975478  are so close (being twins) but I can understand what }{\insrsid9058216 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote 
s going through with a horse on death\rquote s door. She didn\rquote 
t want us to go (she said) so we drank too much red wine instead and watched the start of Papillon (good film). I was too knackered though; my stamina gives out a lot sooner under the influence of alcohol.
\par Mam\rquote s birthday was a queer day. It\rquote s rare that I get the chance to spend time with any of my siblings at home and we had a lovely day apart from the fact that we were all waiting to hear what was going to happen with }{\insrsid11162017 
[sister]}{\insrsid2975478 . She phoned to say he\rquote d been put down, bladder tumour. I think it must be pretty rare. She still said we shouldn\rquote t go down. }{\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478 
 could have easily gone (and Mam) because Lynxes on school hols (jammy teacher!). I stayed on till quite late because both my brother and stepfather wanted to see }{\insrsid11162017 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  \endash 
 he was so excited to see them, sometimes he just makes us all laugh.
\par I had a depressing start to the day back at work \endash  just over a month ago I amputated a dog\rquote s leg. The leg was fractured over 6 months ago, appeared to heal and then suddenly worsen. We suspected a bone infection but she didn\rquote 
t respond to treatment so I x-rayed her again and it looked like a bone tumour. She did well after the operation until last week when she developed a hard knobbly swellin
g near her shoulder and her lungs were infiltrated. I felt so sad for her and the family. She was a lovely placid and very brave dog and it is just so unfair. I don\rquote 
t want to give up on these cases and I feel that euthanasia is a poor treatment in this cas
e, I so wanted her to have a couple more years. I never would have put her or the family through a ghastly op like amputation if I had known that she would get so little benefit. The farmer\rquote 
s son (who worked the dog until she retired) was conspicuous by his absence \endash  he\rquote s rebuilding the milking parlour ready to restock so his sister did the honours and came to help me.
\par Had to switch to party mode \endash  }{\insrsid10638796 [son\rquote s]}{\insrsid2975478  2}{\super\insrsid2975478 nd}{\insrsid2975478  birthday. The sandpit was a roaring success, as was the trike and cake from Grandma and Granddad. 
We had a super relaxing day (mostly outdoors). This weather makes life a lot easier, I couldn\rquote t have coped with all those little boys inside!
\par Escaped to the horses at Asby to take water. It\rquote s so peaceful up there. I\rquote ve really missed being able to go up there this last year \endash  there\rquote s still yellow tape on my gate and I don\rquote 
t even have livestock! I wonder who they (DEFRA) thought the field belongs to? Should get out riding this next week with a bit of luck and a bit of spare time. I think I\rquote ll have to shelve the plans to show the Arabs, I haven\rquote 
t got started soon enough.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 6
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Our new vet started this week. Bright, young, enthusiastic and full of new ideas. I feel very out of touch. I didn\rquote t go on any CPD courses last year, for most of the year I felt as if 
we were unclean, and I was so tired with working such long days it seemed too much hard work to organise extra childcare etc. to allow me to go away for more than a day. I feel out of touch generally though and a lot of it has to do with working part-time
.
\par Big day on Wednesday, }{\insrsid15604176 [son\rquote s]}{\insrsid2975478  1}{\super\insrsid2975478 st}{\insrsid2975478 
 morning at Biggins Nursery. I think my new hobby is worrying!! Am I doing the right thing setting off on new (extra and expensive) childcare arrangements? I think I feel guilty because it\rquote s for my benefit, not for extra work. It\rquote 
s now going to cost me an extra \'a37.50 to ride my horse on a Wednesday! But I am starting to break }{\insrsid16659592 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478  in as well and I can\rquote 
t handle a 4 year old horse with a 2 year old boy around. Anyway the nursery seemed a big hit and I had my first ride out on Ashby fell. I actually went over the track to the Dowly tree instead of on the road. She (the horse) was quite anxious leading the
 other two, and a bit excited to be out in the open space of the fell \endash  so was I. There seems to be just one lot of fell sheep on there \endash  they must be H\rquote s I think. Nobody else has started to heft sheep up there yet. The \lquote 
dowly tree\rquote  will be looking sad and lonely for a bit longer.
\par I have missed being up on that fell so much. Margaret Little asking if we\rquote re going to the village hall quiz on Friday \endash  probably not because we\rquote re going out for a meal for }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote 
s birthday. Felt guilty about not supporting village activities and started justifying myself to her. I hate it though when people use FMD to make you feel bad. She kept saying how few \lquote does\rquote 
 there were last year, how nice it is for all the village to get together etc. \endash  all true but I can\rquote t get babysitters and nights off to do everything and }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 
 is way more important than the village quiz. He put up with such a lot of shite last year and never complained \endash  far too tolerant!
\par We had a lovely meal on the Friday night. }{\insrsid16659592 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  slept out at T\rquote s for the first time in ages but I couldn\rquote t have a lie in because of the judge\rquote 
s course for the Arab Horse Society. I really enjoyed it \endash  it was arranged for last year but had to be postponed due to FMD \endash  it was worth waiting for and I couldn\rquote t have gone last year even if it had been on. Went to see }{
\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478  and }{\insrsid16659592 [sister\rquote s boyfriend]}{\insrsid2975478  on Sunday. Seemed to spend all day being fed (she\rquote s like Mam!)}{\insrsid16659592 .}{\insrsid2975478  }{\insrsid16659592 [Son]}{
\insrsid2975478  took a real shine to }{\insrsid16659592 [sister\rquote s}{\insrsid2975478  boyfriend}{\insrsid16659592 ]}{\insrsid2975478  which entertained us all. She seems to be coping ok with }{\insrsid16659592 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote 
s demise. Martin has cleaned up one of }{\insrsid16659592 his}{\insrsid2975478  shoes and mounted it with a plaque \endash  he\rquote s very thoughtful.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 7
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 I have decided that I am happy on dry days when I can ride or work my horses, }{
\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  and I can get outside to play and then he\rquote s happier and people who come into work are more smiley on good days too. }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 
 and I went to a birthday party this week. He had a brilliant time but I felt very out of place. Everybody else was immaculately dressed and made up while }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  and I had to rush back from having a bonfire to
 burn all the old hay in Musgrave field to quickly wash and change. I\rquote d rather have carried on tidying up the field, it\rquote s still a real mess and at least I have the grass seed now. It had better grow, the price it was!!
\par I was really pleased with }{\insrsid14056051 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478  on Wednesday. He\rquote s coming on quite nicely with his lunging now, he seems to be quite amenable. Dental appointment on Friday \endash  I hope my dentist never retires \endash 
 I don\rquote t think they make dentists that are more interested in people and their teeth than money any more. I always have a good chat to him so we carried on our discussion about my working conditions, comparing them to his sons etc. (he\rquote 
s a vet too). He was quite surprised when I told him about the partnership talks. Last time I had a good heart to heart it was after the threatened redundancy. It\rquote 
s no wonder I feel confused about the future at times. Nearly 2 years ago when I was on maternity leave they thought they might have to make me redundant. Now they want to release a bit of capital and take things 
easier they want me to buy in!! This time last year I didn\rquote t know if }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  or I would have a job!! Now I have to decide to commit myself to at least 20 more years as a vet.
\par Went out with girls from work to a 40}{\super\insrsid2975478 th}{\insrsid2975478 . Didn\rquote t really want to go but of course we had a great time once we got there. I think I have got out of the habit of evenings out. Still can\rquote 
t get used to the freedom the mobile phone gives us, and spend all the time checking that there\rquote s enough signal/battery etc. Had a hell of a hangover \endash  too much draught coke. Hell it\rquote s worse than cider!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 8
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 The shit is hitting the fan. We\rquote 
re having problems with some imported Dutch heifers. We were waiting for this, especially on this particular farm. The management\rquote s not the best and the father takes
 more advice from his feed merchant than us vets. There is obviously a viral infection going through the heifers and Farmer B presumed they were already vaccinated (no documentation). They are also showing signs of gastro-intestinal upset which could be m
anagement. Oh hell why did he buy 80 first calvers. Nobody would willingly put themselves under that stress}{\insrsid14056051 . [N}{\insrsid2975478 ew vet) is interested but B}{\insrsid14056051  }{\insrsid2975478 and W}{\insrsid14056051  }{
\insrsid2975478 are obviously trying to keep their distance. They\rquote ve been embroiled in herd problems on this farm before.
\par I am now obviously the senior vet in charge of this problem and I\rquote m not even at work every day. It\rquote s too much for }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478  to cope with and the farmer will get pissed off soon and I bet it\rquote 
s us that catch the flak!
\par Cheered myself up with 1\'bd hours of R & R with the horses on Wednesday. Lovely day. Rode down onto the common but it was hard work as the other two horses were shouting for daisy all the time I was out on her. }{\insrsid14056051 [horse]}{
\insrsid2975478  decided that he would be bob}{\insrsid14056051 b}{\insrsid2975478 ly when I worked him but I\rquote m getting confident that I know how his mind works.
\par We had a bit of a stand-off but I made sure it didn\rquote t turn into a battle and he did as he was asked in the end, so we finished on a good note. I think it will be quite satisfying bringing him on myself \endash  even though its going to take
 months at this rate. Some people work on young horses twice a day, he\rquote s lucky if he gets trained twice a week.
\par Work is really settling down now. The lambing time rush has passed and we\rquote re catching up on our TB testing for DEFRA. It\rquote s a bit more taxing having to do such young animals in the restocked herds but most people are fairly well organised. We
\rquote re not going to get some of the herds done before turn out I wonder if DEFRA have any recommendations for catching wild Limousin heifers in the middle of a field \endash  probably not they don\rquote t think that far ahead.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 9
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
I hate Mondays again. Had supper at 11.45 pm. There was a problem with my mobile when I was on call (I hate mobiles as well) and I went to calve a cow one and a half-hours after the first call came in. I was so mad \endash  firstly because we don\rquote 
t make our clients wait that long for an emergency to become a disaster and second because }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478 s wife has no idea about passing jobs on \endash  she should have got another vet to go since I was obviously busy but she jus
t passed the message on to }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478  to let her sort it out \endash  and W}{\insrsid14056051 \rquote }{\insrsid2975478 s wife gets paid for doing the phones! Anyway all\rquote s well \endash 
 live cow and a tremendous bull calf, and one of the easiest caesareans I have done in ages. 
\par }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  and }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  seem to forget that it is th
eir business (and reputation) at stake. Ultimately the buck stops with them. Both of them seem to have had enough of business management and hassle to last a lifetime. Last year has done a lot of damage to a lot of people. I know I am a lot less tolerant 
than I used to be.
\par This week started badly and improved. Farrier came and trimmed all 3 horses, bollocked me because they hadn\rquote t been seen for over a year (I did tidy them a bit myself though). Had a lovely afternoon at Rheged with Mam. We started going whe
n FMD was on because it was sort of neutral, non-agricultural ground. We sat and chatted while }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  played in the soft play centre \endash 
 everybody happy. Unfortunately I went down with the worst dose of food poisoning I had ever had, I was up all night. Went into work late \endash  I wouldn\rquote t have gone at all except I had a 2}{\super\insrsid2975478 nd}{\insrsid2975478 
 TB to test to do on a restocked farm and couldn\rquote t bear to start the whole thing again. I recovered as the afternoon went on and even managed to dehorn 10 cows. The thought of }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  sending fragile, young }{
\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478  to help spurred me on a bit. I was knackered when I finished. Took me another 2 days to recover. }{\insrsid14056051 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478  doing well, bridle and saddle on now, looking grown up. I\rquote 
m quite proud of him. He was so chilled out today I tried long reining him \endash  that confused him but he was very sensible.
\par Norleen and I didn\rquote t go to the 1}{\super\insrsid2975478 st}{\insrsid2975478  date at the Rochdale show, I still didn\rquote t feel right and }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  was going to fit the new fuel pump to my car \endash 
 but then he started to feel ill too. What a waste of a Saturday off.  Made it to the show on Sunday \endash  pretty good ridden classes, and all the senior in hand classes. We were laughing because we\rquote 
re so out of practice. There are two years worth of young stock that we\rquote ve never seen due to babies in 2000 and FMD in 2001 \endash  we felt really out of touch. There are a few imported stallions and mares that we haven\rquote 
t seen before too. We had a brilliant day.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 10
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 What\rquote s worse than working on call on Mondays \endash 
 yes working Bank Holidays! We hoped to shut at 12 \endash  ha ha! I got home for lunch at 2pm. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478 
 kindly took the phones for a couple of hours in the afternoon (not long enough to go anywhere) and I was back out working by tea time.
\par My car failed its MOT because the back brake callipers were all gunged up \endash  the mechanic says it\rquote s disinfectant that does it \endash  bloody DEFRA, I bet there\rquote s no chance of compensation for that. It wouldn\rquote 
t be so bad if it was a practice car but now that I\rquote m part-time I have to paddle my own canoe. All the local garage owners warned us last year that these things would happen \endash  what could we do? We felt obliged to drive into all the \lquote 
voluntary\rquote  disinfectant sites \endash  it doesn\rquote t look good if the local vets aren\rquote t disinfecting. My beautiful old Audi, God knows what other horrors are lurking wher
e the FAM has spilled in my boot etc. Hell it makes me mad. All the destruction, physical and mental and we had so little to say in any of it.
\par Well, my car spent the rest of the week in the garage so I used borrowed wheels. Went to do a wee talk at Stainsmore pre-school in }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 s transit van \endash  very professional. The children didn\rquote 
t care; they just wanted to meet my dog! }{\insrsid5011890 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  missed a birthday party on the Saturday because I was still at work \endash  more guilt, not that he knows he missed it. Lovely day on Sunday with my horse \endash 
 went for a three hour ride over in County Durham. We trailed round arable fields and nice lanes \endash  all very different from here. }{\insrsid14056051 [other horse]}{\insrsid2975478 
 was an absolute saint and did very well to have no shoes on. She really did us proud.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 11
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Got my car back \endash 
 that cheered me up. Bad news about the imported heifers, two more have died. At least the PM exams and sampling are free because it\rquote s a restocked herd. Farmer getting angry now (at Dutch farmers) but taking it out on }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{
\insrsid2975478 . Very unfair, she\rquote s spent hours checking over his cattle and taking samples.
\par Didn\rquote t get my usual R & R on Wed \endash  absolutely piddling down. Started sorting out a few jobs that I have been avoiding, the sort I used to do on wet Sundays \endash  now will become wet Wednesda
y jobs!! Called in at work for coffee and ended up with a call for the afternoon. Very interesting job too \endash  went to sedate two horses for the dentist \endash  it was absolutely fascinating. 
\par }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  has another 2}{\super\insrsid2975478 nd}{\insrsid2975478  cousin this week \endash  the family is really sprouting. Had a tough calving Thursday night \endash 
 torsion of the uterus. I can do these now, I used to absolutely dread them. Unfortunately she\rquote d been on too long and the calf was born dead, heifer fine though. I hate going to that farm, the farmer is a right old perverted slime ball and I
\rquote ll\rquote  dance on his grave. Started with a real head cold - \endash h crap.
\par Went to see Mam and Stewart, }{\insrsid2441540 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  on top form. It\rquote s brilliant seeing him interact with my family. He has really strengthened the bonds in our family. }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  fevered at
 night, starting with the same cold I presume \endash  no sleep for me. }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  never seems to hear all the commotion. Still felt ill on Saturday \endash  }{\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478  and }{
\insrsid11162017 [sister]}{\insrsid2975478 s birthday. At least I remembered to post their cards in plenty of time this year. 
\par Went shopping for wallpaper on Sunday to cheer me up. }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  went off \lquote pest controlling\rquote  with his dogs. They went up through Tubby\rquote 
s wood. They found nothing but at least the dogs had a good ratch. He says he only now feels ok about walking across fields. I didn\rquote t even realise that he still felt that he couldn\rquote t go round all his old haunts \endash  we must talk more!

\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 19
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 TB test cancelled on Monday and Thursday this week because the farmer can\rquote 
t cope with the extra hassle. He\rquote s a bit of a woman at the best of times but he\rquote s been even worse since FMD. }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  was very understanding he seems to have the farmers measure. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{
\insrsid2975478  didn\rquote t seem that understanding.
\par Very upset on Wednesday afternoon. I had to put down my own terrier after he took off and chased the neighbour\rquote s sheep \endash  for the second time. I can\rquote 
t understand why he went so strange; he used to be fine with stock. I had a miserable afternoon waiting for }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  to come home to bury him. I\rquote d had such a good morning with the horses too. Dizzy and }{
\insrsid14056051 [horse]}{\insrsid2975478  were both going well, I felt better once }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  came home. He said I\rquote d done the right thing but I felt as though I\rquote 
d failed somehow because it should never have happened in the first place. Maybe it\rquote s because he had nothing to do last year, no interesting walks, no rabbiting etc, I don\rquote t know. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 20
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Brilliant time Tues/Wed. Went to my sisters with Mam and }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{
\insrsid2975478 , it\rquote s much easier to keep in touch with my family post-FMD. I hardly went anywhere last year. We went shopping to Edinburgh, mam\rquote s looking for an outfit for my brother\rquote s wedding, unsuccessfully so far! I\rquote 
ve just realised that I haven\rquote t seen }{\insrsid4850657 [brother and wife?]}{\insrsid2975478  on their farm since FMD broke out. We must go soon, it\rquote s a brilliant place for recharging batteries and they are the best bit of my step family.
 We didn\rquote t go to the Cumberland show with the horses. I haven\rquote 
t got back into the swing of things yet. I think it was a bit of a washout without the farming side, and it rained. I offered to be the biosecurity officer for our local show so that they could 
get things up and running properly. They had money and trophies donated last year for new cattle classes and there would be real interest in fat cattle classes and young handler classes now. DEFRA (the bastards) managed to put the committee off.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 21
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Sprayed weeds in field \endash  only depressing day this week, it\rquote 
s never going to recover properly. The Landlord arrived when we\rquote d just finished the first half and said he\rquote d decided to reseed it in August!! After much discussion I persuaded him it would be a was
te of time and money to put horses back on a newly seeded field over winter. Now I\rquote m worried about what happens in spring. Will we be terminated or just moved to another field? I wish I\rquote d moved the horses at the usual time (1}{
\super\insrsid2975478 st}{\insrsid2975478  April) then we wouldn\rquote t have been caught up among IPs and DCs. Something will sort out, it always does.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Dairy 22
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Excellent week. Off to Malvern with friends for the National Arabian Horse Show. }{
\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  went off to Grannies for the holiday!! I had a marvellous time for three days watching the most beautiful horses and came back absolutely shattered.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 23
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Few probs at work with new assistant. She\rquote s a bit \lquote }{\insrsid4850657 wh}{
\insrsid2975478 iney\rquote }{\insrsid4850657 [?]}{\insrsid2975478 , she\rquote s always bending the ear of the nearest receptionist and they are sick. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  has offered her a 12 month contract \endash  b
ut whether or not she\rquote ll accept it is another matter. From what I can gather she\rquote s going to end up with better working conditions than me. }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote 
s not too happy about it all but neither of them are willing to grasp the nettle. They\rquote ve both backed off since last year, they can\rquote t wait to get off home and I can\rquote t step in since they\rquote 
ve changed their minds about my partnership, and I\rquote m only part-time. Good weekend, Lowther on Saturday \endash  didn\rquote t see many of the usual faces. The only thing that spoiled it was the mud \endash 
 we brought more than our fair share home with }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  and the pushchair \endash  no biosecurity pressure washer anywhere!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 24
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478  (the }{\insrsid10754166 A}{\insrsid2975478 
ssistant) on holiday for 2 weeks, things seem more like old times. The cages aren\rquote t full of animals on drips, I\rquote m working extra days and enjoying it \endash  it\rquote 
s tiring but good. Highlight of the week on Thursday: Brough Show, there weren\rquote t many farmers there but loads of horses and ponies instead of sheep. Much talk of DEFRA regulations, none complimentary. It just wasn\rquote 
t the same without the sheep, it felt flat. I wonder what the gimmer lamb sales will be like?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 25
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Knackered \endash  don\rquote t think I could cope with full time work any more!! }{
\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478  still on holiday. Felt guilty about }{\insrsid5011890 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  being farmed out all week. I man
aged to work myself up about our charity horse show on Saturday. I tried to hand over the organisation to three other folk and still ended up sorting out all the insurance and rosettes, and they changed the date so I had less time to organise, and it wasn
\rquote t advertised. 
\par It was the worst show we\rquote ve ever had. It takes as much time to organise it for the few as it does for the many! I felt so disappointed. I thought we would have a real good turnout this time after having to cancel last year. Oh well there\rquote s a
lways next year! I\rquote ll need to make sure they don\rquote t change the date again and at least I might be able to take the horses next time. Decided to cheer myself up by taking }{\insrsid10754166 [other horse]}{\insrsid2975478 
 over to school her round the jumps on the Sunday but I couldn\rquote t catch her (she must have known) so that just put the tin hat on the weekend.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 26
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Two trotting meetings this week. I landed both of them and both nights on call. Another Bank Holiday with no time off and I had to take }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  to both because }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  was grouse
-beating. Both meetings were quite relaxed but there was one nasty crash at Appleby. Had a really nice day out at Chatsworth Game Fair with Helen and Neil. It\rquote s the first time we\rquote 
ve managed to visit them and it took hours to get there. We were invited last year but the advert said they didn\rquote t want any Cumbrians \endash  social outcasts, as if we didn\rquote 
t feel like the armpit of British Agriculture as it was. I really enjoyed our day out, I felt as if we\rquote d had a weekend away not just a day. We\rquote ll have to think of some more trips, it\rquote s too easy just to stay at home \endash 
 we always have plenty to do.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Dairy 27
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 It\rquote s started again \endash 
 DEFRA have found a new way to cock up our lives. They have now complicated life with exemptions from the 20 day standstill including new stuff about isolation units. The farmers have all been notified by post. Some haven\rquote 
t read it, some have read it and don\rquote t understand it. Farmers have to isolate new stock bought via auctions etc from any contact with other stock by 50 m outside, or they can go on
 standstill but their neighbours can move stock from the next door field without a problem \endash  it\rquote s mad. I don\rquote t understand where they are coming from. Well I do sort of but as usual it\rquote 
s badly thought out, and we have to sell this idea to the farmers. How will it be policed? Will it matter? Would it stop another massive outbreak? It doesn\rquote t take much to wind everyone up again. It\rquote s not helped at work by }{\insrsid14056051 
B}{\insrsid2975478  defending the DEFRA line and }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  dissing it. What will the clients think?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 28
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Crap week. Puncture on Thursday during lunch hour. Struggled to get locking nuts off \endash 
 felt feckless. God I have so little patience these days. And I missed BEVA congress \endash  couldn\rquote t sort out childminding etc., and the best days were Friday and Saturday \endash  there was no way I could go. I was really disappointed \endash 
 nothing to do with FMD though. I don\rquote t feel as if I get much encouragement from work, they are ok about paying for CPD courses but they don\rquote t seem to make it easy to swap weekends etc. They\rquote re not bothered themselves so I 
suppose they don\rquote t understand all the different things you get from CPD.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 29
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Worked extra so }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478 
 could go to sheep meeting at Malvern. Pissed off!! It is not easy to do this job with a husband and a family to consider and I suppose the timing stinks since I missed my equine course last week. The week improved considerably by Thursday \endash 
 we went to Guilford for an Arab horse convention \endash  nothing to do with work but very enjoyable. I\rquote ve been waiting more than 10 years for this. I hope I live long e
nough to go to the next one!! We talked to some men on the train (unheard of in Surrey apparently) about Cumbria, farming, FMD and foxhunting. Once we reassured them that Newcastle was not in Cumbria we had an interesting crack!
\par I hardly ever meet anyone that is not connected with farming and the countryside they really have no idea what it\rquote s like \endash  I don\rquote 
t know anything about IT either which is what their job is! I end up feeling so frustrated that agriculture and therefore large animal practice is in such
 a precarious position, it seems to me to be such a basic fundamental part of life compared to computers and yet the emphasis is not on basic stuff anymore. Surely we need things like agriculture and basic manufacturing to underpin everything else. No won
der nobody was bothered about us suffering anxiety, fear, confusion last year when we were in the throes of FMD and the Penrith Spur was certainly under-reported. They wouldn\rquote t have had so many marches in London pre-FMD.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 30
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Quite week. Still tired from last week \endash  loads of photos to develop again \endash 
 it was great, saw horses I\rquote d never seen before and got 2 great videos of long dead horses that appear in my horses pedigrees. }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  was a bit off with me when I picked him up Monday \endash 
 a bit unsettled with being away I suppose. Oh this job just interferes with a social life missed another wedding this week \endash  on call again.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 31
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Took a horse to Penrith vets for an X-ray. They have a super new hospital just out of town. Seems really well set up. They have a really good attitude to work and clients. I think we need a shake up at work. Maybe }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{
\insrsid2975478 \rquote s way of working isn\rquote t too bad. Neil said they were \'bd million in the red at the height of FMD \endash  they must have been so worried. None of us knew what we\rquote d be left with. We\rquote 
ve definitely got a lot of routine work because we\rquote ve lost such a lot of dairy farms. It\rquote s never going to be the same again and I\rquote m not good at accepting change.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 32
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Sad week. One of our farmer\rquote s sons was killed in an RTA on the A66. He ha
d only been married two years and was a real canny lad. It shocked everyone and has certainly made me take stock. They have restocked with fancy cattle from down south, and these cattle may have contacted cattle with a variant virus from the USA so they w
ere doing a whole herd test. You could blame this on FMD \endash  if they hadn\rquote t lost their cattle, they wouldn\rquote t have restocked and they wouldn\rquote t be testing the cattle or it wouldn\rquote t have happened if they\rquote 
d stopped for an extra cup of tea. A client brought me a copy of the Cumbria Enquiry. That didn\rquote t half stir up some old feelings. All the things I was so angry about last year were summed up in one phrase I read: \lquote slack organisation\rquote 
. The poor woman who brought the report has spent over \'a31000 treating her dog after it suffered chemical burns from FMD disinfectant on a road map \endash  it now reacts to phenolic compounds including sheep dip and fresh tar. They\rquote 
re moving to Scotland \endash  I hope the dog has a better life there.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 33
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Funny old week. Everyone still shell-shocked about }{\insrsid5011890 [}{\insrsid15217639 farmer
\rquote s }{\insrsid5011890 son]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote s death \endash  no explanation as to how the lorry crashed into his tractor yet. You begin to wonder how any family can cope with that sort of trauma. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  and }{
\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  went to the (huge) funeral. They said his parents were amazing \endash  they do have a strong faith but I can\rquote 
t see that being enough. I went to the graveyard the next day to see the flowers and ended up in tears \endash  it was the messages on the cards especially the ones from his parents and brother and
 sister, I felt so sad for them all. Went for a wee walk with Tracey, she knows him quite well and we talked a lot, trying to make sense of it all. Then blow me on the Thursday, his father and brother were part of a syndicate at the tup sales that paid ov
er \'a3100,000 for a Swaledale tup \endash  I couldn\rquote t believe they\rquote d even gone to the auction never mind doing something like that, it doesn\rquote t seem right to me. The others could have bought the tup for them, I think that\rquote 
s awfully strange. I had another upset farmer\rquote s wife this week. I went to see a downer cow; she\rquote 
d got stuck in the cubicles. We had to carry her to a straw box using the loader tractor and the wife got really upset seeing the cow swinging on the front of the tractor. I felt a bit guilty really because I didn\rquote t think. I just didn\rquote 
t connect the FMD slaughter with an injured cow, but then I didn\rquote t see all that they saw when their herd went down.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 34
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Great week. My brother\rquote s wedding, }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 
 was a page boy in a kilt and he was quite well behaved apart from the second lot of photos \endash  he was well tired and hungry by then! I love being home with my brother and sisters (and their partners) and it\rquote 
s great the way they all have so much time for }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 . We always laugh so much at the \lquote clan gatherings\rquote  I\rquote m sure it\rquote 
s very therapeutic! The amount of alcohol consumed by all at the wedding is definitely not therapeutic.
\par We set off on our holiday (maybe our first family holiday) the day after, in the rain but it turned out ok later. Such a lot of good stuff in one week.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 35
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Had a lovely day, it all worked out well. We may try four or five days away next year now that we\rquote ve got started again. It\rquote s years since we had a proper holiday, I usually miss all the animals when I\rquote m away but not this time \endash 
 I think }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  has more than filled that gap. Had bad news on Wednesday, }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote s van failed its MOT \endash 
 no transport, no money for a new motor. Mild panic, slight depression then the gradual return to my \lquote it will all work out somehow\rquote  attitude. And it did. }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote s M
um and Dad helped us out and I had to relinquish my little \lquote buy a new trailer\rquote  fund.
\par Had a disaster on Sunday morning, caesarean on an uncooperative cow. She got up halfway through the op and pushed her rumen out onto the (very dirty) floor, and she starte
d to haemorrhage. She died four hours later. They ended up with an exceptional bull calf but a dead pedigree Belgian Blue cow. I hate when things die on restocked farms. I think they were quite philosophical about it but I went over and over the whole thi
ng in my head. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  just said \lquote if they\rquote re going to die it\rquote s best they die soon \endash  less time to worry and everyone gets over it quicker too\rquote  I think he may be right. He\rquote 
s definitely easier to talk to these days \endash  he\rquote s like a different person now that Jan\rquote s left.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 36
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Busy week. Testing a restocked herd Monday/Thursday which had travelled all of 5 miles to their new home \endash  a bit of a waste of time but it was a nice day to be out. Really good turnout at the village bonfire. It\rquote 
s a new tradition, started in 200
1 and it was the first village get-together after FMD. At the end of the week I headed South to Cheshire and the Salisbury plain with my friend Ann and her horse to compete in the marathon. What an awful journey we had. The rain poured, the traffic crawle
d. I\rquote m glad I don\rquote t have to use the M6 on a daily basis. I really enjoyed my weekend away but we had to pull the horse out at the half-way point. She was so hyped that we couldn\rquote t get her heart rate down, so she wasn\rquote 
t allowed to continue. I felt really disappointed. I was sure that she had a good chance, well she would have if they had a vet check halfway through.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 37
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
A bit of an anticlimax this week after all the build-up to the marathon. It would have been so different if she\rquote d completed the course. We had a better journey North except for a puncture \endash 
 not handy when you have a horse trailer on. I drove most of the way back to Ann\rquote s. Saw all her horses and then drove home, another 2 hours. Oh I was so pleased to get home. It was a good experience though, I don\rquote 
t think either of us would trail a horse all the way to Salisbury plain for a two hour race again!! There were FMD cases near Ann in Cheshire that didn\rquote t seem to catch hold like they did in Cumbria. Maybe its because there are bigger farms and m
ore arable land.
\par I went to see her in July 2001 and she pointed out various fields that had been cleared of stock \endash  half of them didn\rquote t even have gates on, there was no disinfectant or precautions visible and it was really starting to wipe out our practice
 at home. It was unbelievable. We were sitting in Cumbria thinking that agriculture was doomed, and everything in Cheshire was carrying on as normal. It was a rude awakening for me.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 38
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 More TB testing \endash  all day job testing stock that wouldn\rquote t normal
ly be tested but they\rquote re restocked. They have come from Cheshire though so that does increase the risk. Had a shocking migraine all day Wednesday, went to bed as soon as I\rquote d dropped }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 
 off at Biggins and didn\rquote t wake up until 5pm \endash  2 hours after I should have collected him \endash 
 and I still felt awful. It was terrible driving in the dark and I had to stop three times on the way home. I went back to bed until 9pm and then was fine. I haven\rquote t had a migraine for ages. I was back on top form the next day though. 
We did the TB readings on 172 cattle before lunch \endash  cooking with gas!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 39
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Fed up with all this testing \endash 
 and we may be doing this for the next 4-5 months. Sick of }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478  moaning at work, I don\rquote t know what it would take to make her happy. I think this week has nearly all been a waste of time. I haven\rquote 
t made best use of my free time and I haven\rquote t been on top of my job at work.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 40
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
I was dreading this week because there were so many things to do. I think I avoid adding extra to my schedule but this week I had 3 days away and a night out to cope with. I really don\rquote 
t like the thought of shopping but managed to do some Christmas present locating on Friday. Spent Wednesday with }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  (which was better than I expected) on a National Scrapie Plan training 
day (which was worse than I expected). Bloody DEFRA, they don\rquote t have to do or say much to raise my hackles. Here we are selecting for a resistant genotype and they are spending all their time injecting BSE into sheep\rquote s brains to \lquote 
challenge\rquote  them \endash  how would that ever happen naturally?
\par Nearly missed my night out because of work, It was 10 pm before I got there, but at least I didn\rquote t miss the dancing. It turned into a really good night. Nearly everyone from work was there, and }{\insrsid13509669 J}{\insrsid2975478 
 the ex-receptionist, we always have a good laugh. Ended up working most of the morning \endash  don\rquote t know if }{\insrsid14056051 W}{\insrsid2975478  was hung over or just idle, but he\rquote ll have to pay me for the hours. I don\rquote 
t work extra out of the goodness of my heart now I have all my own overheads to fund. }{\insrsid14056051 [new vet]}{\insrsid2975478 \rquote s the star for avoiding extra or dirty work \endash 
 then it usually falls to me. She says she wants more large animal work and then does her best to avoid it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 41
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Tired this week. }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  came back from Mavis\rquote 
s full of cold, improved a bit and then woke up screaming on Tuesday night.  It was a very long night and }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  wasn\rquote t even here t enjoy/share it as he\rquote 
d left to fly to Tampa at 5am that morning. God, I don\rquote t fancy being a single mum.
\par He soon started to improve after 24hrs on antibiotics \endash  ear and chest infection \endash  I\rquote ve never seen him in such pain. Of course, he was nearly better by the time }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478 
 got back. I really struggled on my own and had to take a day off on Thursday but still had to go and do a second TB test otherwise I would have had to start all over again \endash  we didn\rquote t have time to test them twice. And it\rquote 
s a restocked herd so we had to do them all. It\rquote s really hard trying to do the best for everyone.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 42
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Pretty good week until the weekend. Had a good night out for Tracey\rquote 
s birthday, and I was really chuffed she invited }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  too. He was well behaved too nut unfortunately now thinks he can go to \lquote the pub\rquote  so we have to go out to meetings to avoid a tantrum. I don\rquote 
t really think I have suffered many after effects from FMD except a lower anger threshold and a loss of faith in \lquote the powers that be\rquote . I\rquote m much more worried about some of our client\rquote 
s mental health. I know there are several who have suffered severe depression and they are not all farmers that were culled out. The sleepless nights were back with a vengeance \endash  }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 
 started with chickenpox at the weekend and nobody had any sleep.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 43
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Absolutely shattered, somebody else\rquote s chickenpox is nearly as bad as your own. I don
\rquote t think I have had a full nights sleep for over a fortnight. I still had a lovely time at Christmas though.  I was sure that }{\insrsid5011890 [partner]}{\insrsid2975478  and }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478 
 would be pleased with their presents. }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  suddenly brightened dup on Christmas Eve on the way to Mam\rquote s and never broke stride after that. He was son top fo
rm. I was so tired that I fell asleep on Saturday evening and missed the village Hall Christmas Party \endash  the highlight of the village social calendar.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 44
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
The threat of TB rears its ugly head; maybe TB is the new FMD. Went to do a private TB test for a farmer who has restocked and passed his restocking checks. Unfortunately he bought 3 heifers in November and the original farm has since gone down with TB.

\par He isolated the heifers as soon as he heard and waited for DEFRA \endash  they didn\rquote t come so we did. I hoped for the best and expected the worst. One of the heifers reacted \endash  I didn\rquote t know what to do or say. The farmer\rquote 
s wife was really upset, she wished they hadn\rquote t gone back into farming. }{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478  the boss has phoned DEFRA that morning regarding these heifers only to be told that youngstock don\rquote t pose much of a risk. They don
\rquote t seem to have much idea at all, and don\rquote t have a clue about getting on with the job. They\rquote ve had three weeks to track down the calves out of the cows that were reactors. They seem to let us d
own just when we need them most! Oh they make me boil and we are going to have to cope with the aftermath again.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 45
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Felt a bit flat and tired this week. The test I had this week was hard work, trying to catch cows in cubicles is not fun. We were all covered in muck at the end of it and the second day was worse because he had about 14 to rectal after the test.
\par Wednesday, my day of respite was taken up looking after Tracey in bed with cold \endash  she\rquote s really down still and I can\rquote t seem to do anything to make her feel better. I know she\rquote ll come out of it eventually but it\rquote 
s hard not being able to help.
\par I just didn\rquote t feel as if I had any time to myself this week, and I really missed out. If I start working Wednesdays I\rquote m going to miss it every week. I\rquote ll have to have another plan! It\rquote 
s a bit better at the weekend, but I think we all need some better weather and I miss doing stuff with the horses.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 46
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Oh I\rquote 
m mad again with DEFRA. I had to go back to the herd with the reactor and test every single bovine on the place, except the two remaining heifers from the infected herd. I don\rquote t understand why they can\rquote 
t just take out those heifers too. The poor farmer and his wife will be on tender hooks until the end of March at the earliest. If they hadn\rquote t asked for a
 private test goodness knows when DEFRA would have got there.  While I was testing DEFRA phoned the farmers wife to confirm that the slaughtered heifer had visible lesions \endash  so that puts paid to the theory that youngstock weren\rquote 
t a danger. Hope this news makes them get a finger out. Had a lovely day with Mam and }{\insrsid14056051 [son]}{\insrsid2975478  on Tuesday \endash  we sat and talked for over an hour in the car park, everything tested clear at the check test \endash 
 so far so good.
\par Bad day on Thursday. The behaviour course I was enrolled on has bee
n cancelled  - no explanation just a cheque returned to the practice with a wee note. I was so disappointed, even though it was going to be a lot of extra work over the next 10 months and extra hassle and extra childminding I think I could have coped. The
n at lunchtime I bent my car door after stopping to help somebody stuck on an icy patch \endash  I haven\rquote t got all the bits sorted that were knackered by FMD disinfecting yet and there\rquote 
s more repairs, and I have to pay for it myself now that I don\rquote t have a practice car \endash  I was well fed up!
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Dairy 47
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Busy week. TB Testing again. Started working odd Wednesdays this week, so spent all day Wednesday up the back end of suckler cows (very dangerous) taking bloods for brucellosis and then blood sampling Swaledales for scrapie testing.
\par We have so many tests still to do \endash  but not many dreadfully out of date, and I think we\rquote ve done quite a lot of the restocking tests but its all quite mind numbing stuff \endash 
 not much clinical acumen required for getting blood out of cows \endash  just 
quick reactions to dodge shit and flying feet. Very late finished Monday by the time I had all my paperwork done. A, a college friend landed Tuesday en-route to Leeds for a herd health meeting \endash 
 6 hours driving for a meeting. We talked a bit about FMD \endash  she worked as a TVI towards the end of the outbreak. They have a lot more trouble with TB up in Aberdeenshire \endash 
 once it gets into a herd they struggle to get rid of it again. I hope it doesn\rquote t get to be a huge problem round here. Collected a fair few bruises on Thursday \endash  pregnant heifers to dehorn \endash 
 they should have been done in 2001 but of course the routine work was put off. I don\rquote t know what the excuse was leaving them al through 2002 but they were massive. Anyway, it saved me going to the gym on Wednesday night!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 48
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 I have just handed in the latest batch of diaries, and started a new \lquote session\rquote 
.  I have been thinking that F&M doesn\rquote t really affect me much anymore.  Our work has changed because of the restocking that has taken place since with all the new disease problems that have been bought in as \lquote additional extras\rquote 
 and the extra TB testing etc. but mentally I am not aware of even thinking about the events of 2001 that often.  I still feel upset if someone tells me about their own particular experie
nces which are often heart rending but probably no more than if they were discussing another devastating disease problem.  I still have little tolerance for the workings of DEFRA even though they are providing us with lots of \lquote bread and butter
\rquote  work.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 51
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 I\rquote m sick of doing caesareans on cows \endash 
 who encouraged all the bloody beef farmers to restock with Belgian Blues?  I\rquote m not sure that we should be continuing to allow animals to breed that can\rquote t reproduce naturally.  It doesn\rquote t seem right that we sh
ould almost expect a caesarean the day that a new cow is put in calf.  We used to have occasional troubles before, and not all caesareans are on Belgian Blues but now we do at least one caesarean every week, (}{\insrsid14056051 B}{\insrsid2975478 
 did two in one day) and they are bloody hard work!!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 52
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 I always think of the 23}{\super\insrsid2975478 rd}{\insrsid2975478  Feb as being the day that 
}{\i\ul\insrsid2975478 I}{\insrsid2975478  realised we might be in the shit in 2001.  It wouldn\rquote t have passed unnoticed round here \endash  several people mentioned the date in the following week \endash  yet it wasn\rquote t until the 4}{
\super\insrsid2975478 th}{\insrsid2975478  April th
at F&M came into our practice.  Loads of our farmers lost a lot of seep early on though because they were wintering away on dairy farms further down the Eden valley.  This used to just involve the hoggs but now they are encouraged to leave the fells almos
t
 empty and are paid to remove even pregnant ewes to lower ground.  It seems ludicrous that, on certain farms, the fell sheep only spend summertime on the fells.  The rest of the time they are in-bye land for tupping or lambing, and then are wintered in sh
eep sheds or on dairy farms, sometimes quite far away from \lquote home\rquote .  I did get quite upset when I read the stories in the book.  This time I think I had more empathy for the \lquote tourism\rquote 
 businesses affected.  They must have been so frustrated, and probably ended up much worse off that the affected farmers.  In our area the farmers who \lquote survived\rquote 
 are the ones (in general) who are struggling for survival now, and their farms have had no capital investment at all.  In fact some of the survivors are still very bitter about the whole episode.  Its so sad what this has done to some people. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 55
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 
Check TB test at Campbells, went well finished in good time.  Running into trouble because the other cows taken in for winter are calving and they have no room.  However, they have found someone to take and slaughter all the big bullocks \endash 
 they are going to be moved, under licence, direct to a slaughter house so at least they will have some income (the first this year!).  Everything tested clear including the 2 heifers brou
ght in from the farm that had the reactor so they are feeling a little bit more confident.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 56
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Bloody DEFRA cocked up again with C}{\insrsid13509669 \rquote }{\insrsid2975478 s test \endash 
 had to go back to test 11 baby calves (how cruel?).  }{\insrsid9045127 H}{\insrsid2975478 ad to go back to H}{\insrsid13509669 \rquote }{\insrsid2975478 s as well to test one inconclusive reactor.  All of them were OK
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 Diary 60
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid2975478 I think the lambing time rush is settling down again \endash  of course there aren\rquote 
t quite as many fell sheep about as usual \endash  and probably won\rquote t be again if the payments are de-coupled \endash  numbers won\rquote t be as profitable as acres.
\par }}