{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f99\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f100\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f102\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f103\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f104\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f105\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f106\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f107\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f110\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f113\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f114\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f117\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1534893\rsid2753187\rsid8203489\rsid8722323\rsid9659086
\rsid9855707}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr15\min58}{\version5}{\edmins23}{\nofpages20}{\nofwords4548}{\nofchars25929}{\nofcharsws30417}{\vern16391}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot8203489 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid8722323 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8722323 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8722323 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid8722323 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid8722323 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid8203489 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid8722323 
\par Interview ID:  PM08}{\insrsid8722323 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs18\insrsid8722323 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid1534893 3}}}{\cs18\insrsid8722323 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid8722323 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\ul\insrsid8722323 Date of Interview: 06/03/02
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Date of birth: 1963
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 Occupation: Group 6}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid8722323 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid8722323 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid8722323  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid8722323 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid8722323 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid8722323 I drove into the car-park of the modern veterinary practice.  The receptionist warned me that M had been called out on an emergency so I
 waited 40 minutes or so. M greeted me warmly and took me to a meeting-sized room upstairs that was dominated by a large table with chairs and shelves of text-books and manuals.  We moved into an adjacent small kitchen to make tea and then settled down wi
th the tape switched on}{\f0\insrsid8722323 . 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 Can you tell me a little bit about yourself and your background?

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Born in Sheffield, brought up south of England, studied at Edinburgh University, got married, worked in N as a mixed practice for two years, and I\rquote ve been working here in Cumbria since }{\f0\insrsid9855707 [then]}{
\f0\insrsid8722323 .  I\rquote m married with four children.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And why Cumbria?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I wanted to do dairy practice.  I spent quite a long time in the last six months when I was at N working for a dairy practice where I could become a partner.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And what about your wife?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 My wife is a teacher, she has just started back doing supply.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And where was she originally from?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 She is }{\f0\insrsid9855707 [non-UK]}{\f0\insrsid8722323  by birth but she was brought up in }{\f0\insrsid9855707 [UK]}{\f0\insrsid8722323 .
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So neither of you are local but you\rquote ve been here some years?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Fourteen years.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 And I know you\rquote ve got a son who is seven, do you have an
y other children?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 There }{\f0\insrsid9855707 [are two more boys]}{\f0\insrsid8722323  and a girl}{\f0\insrsid9855707 .}{\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So thinking about foot and mouth, obviously you\rquote re not old enough to have any first hand experience of the 67\endash  68 outbreak, or do you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I have a very vague recollection of walking to school and seeing notices up, but it\rquote s very vague.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Where was this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Epsom Downs.  There was one farm that still had animals when I was very young.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Since this recent outbreak, did you hear any tales about the 67 out-break?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Not directly.  I have a friend,  who was out in Thailand and I was out there visiting him and he was talking about foot and mouth, because it\rquote 
s one of the problems that they have there and they were vaccinating cattle there, at the market.  So I was talking to him a bit, but it wasn\rquote t just about the 67 out-break, more about the Thailand experience.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So what about the most recent outbreak, what\rquote s your first memory?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 My first memory is actually going back two years, not one year, two years, to
 February 2000, because there was a meeting organised by Maff State Veterinary Service [SVS], for TVIs [Temporary Veterinary Inspectors] , at which they were talking about issues facing agriculture.  TB was one of the ones, and the threat of other zoonoti
c diseases of which the most prevalent was foot and mouth disease.  So that was almost a year to the day before it all blew up again.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Was that part of a series of talks?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 We had another one a year later, just, the speaker who was at the second one was the Welsh D.V.M. [Director of Veterinary Medicine] whose name alludes me.  But he\rquote 
s the chief  epidemiologist,   he was speaking about the out-break of swine [inaudible] disease, no swine fever disease, they\rquote d had just in the previous few months to that, Novem
ber, December, January, and he was speaking about the epidemiology of that, and he had to leave the meeting to go down to London because it was confirmed later on that week.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So did you come away from that first meeting with any sense of alarm?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Not alarm, it\rquote 
s just , yes, you know, zoonotic diseases were around and foot and mouth was probably one of the most worried about but they were obviously very worried about TB spreading from the South West into Cumbria, but obviously it was on the agenda to be looki
ng out for it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So did you come back to this practice with a very clear remit about foot and mouth and what to look out for?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 No.  There was no guidelines.}{\b\f0\insrsid8722323   }{\f0\insrsid8722323 The emphasis was on clinical signs and things like that.  There was a speaker from P, again If I ha
d my notes I could remember his name.  He was speaking about how it quickly became politicised and other things.  So it was quite interesting, and if you look back on it you think,  yes it was very relevant but they were far more concerned with getting ac
r
oss information on epidemiology, information on the clinical presentation rather than on control.  Very little thought actually seemed to have gone on, looking back with hindsight, on the control mechanisms and how if there was [EMPHASIS]  going to be an 
out-break, how it would be coped with.  Looking back I think I was very na\'efve, everybody was very na\'ef
ve, thinking yes if foot and mouth comes it will get slaughtered, and that was that.   And also the emphasis was [EMPHASIS] very much on that it would be in pigs and cattle, that\rquote 
s were it would be.  Because all the text books say sheep are very poor infectors of foot and mouth disease, you know they\rquote ll not produce much virus unless you stress them through an auction in Longtown, whereas pigs produce a large 
amount of virus very quickly.  But again it\rquote s one of the things that I think I get very frustrated with the Ministry\rquote s mindset, is that they have no flexibility, there is no sort of \lquote what ifs\rquote 
, it is, you go across from A to B to C to D and somebody has sat down and thought about a logical pattern, which is fine, but biological systems don\rquote t work like that.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Are you saying almost that it became a political issue and really it should have been very much a veterinary issue?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 No.  What I\rquote m saying is that it became very political very quickly and the Ministry just couldn\rquote t cope. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 In those early days what was -and maybe still is- your view point on vaccination?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Vaccination I\rquote m ambivalent about.  I think the roll over vaccination is to \lquote ring  fence\rquote  around an area that\rquote 
s infected.  By the time of diagnosis of the pigs from the abattoir, the virus had already reached forty-nine separate farms up and down the country, so therefore to use vaccination in its classical role as a \lquote ring a fence\rquote  around that, you
\rquote re too late.  You know, you\rquote re trying to ring fence around forty-nine different areas.  Yes, there was maybe an argument that they should have vaccinated all the sheep in Cumbria rather than slaughtering them, but they didn\rquote 
t have vaccine available and the Ministry did not have the logistics to do it and they weren\rquote t prepared to delegate it down.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 The suggestion is that it got out of control almost immediately. I mean by the first diagnosis, because of movement of live stock, it had already spread beyond a ring infected area?}{\f0\insrsid8722323   
\par 
\par Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So what\rquote s your view then on how it was handled in that early phase?
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323  
\par The early phase, in the initial few weeks London was saying, it\rquote s under control, and telling Carlisle, it\rquote s under control isn\rquote t it Carlisle, 
and Carlisle was going, yes.  Civil servants in Carlisle are chosen for being a second pair of hands  that does everything according to the book and agrees with London about everything. . . . . .
\par 
\par [Telephone rings, tape stopped, interviewee then recaps and interview resumed]
\par . . . . .
\par  and doesn\rquote t make waves, so they agreed with London.  There were cases where well it was obviously out of control, they had dead bodies everywhere and London did not know about it.  When J S came up you could see the colour dr
ain from his face, as we were all stood there and told him, you know, it is [EMPHASIS] out of control, there are [EMPHASIS] dead bodies lying everywhere.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And this was March?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 This was March the 23}{\f0\super\insrsid8722323 rd}{\f0\insrsid8722323  I think it was.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So what was happening in terms of your everyday practice?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I went on March the 2}{\f0\super\insrsid8722323 nd}{\f0\insrsid8722323  to work for Defra.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So did you volunteer?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 We rang Carlisle to say, did they want a vet and they said yes, so we sent one of our assistants.  He worked here, so he volunteered, so he would go.  He rang up and said, it\rquote s desperate here, so by then we weren\rquote 
t doing routine visits and things, we were cutting the work load right down, and I said, look I\rquote ll go as well, we\rquote ll try and see if we can keep it the other side of Carlisle.  The idea was to try and stop foot and mouth getting to Wigton.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So basically you were seconded to Defra, so can you tell me a little bit about your role there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Everybody asks what training do you have when you go to work for the Ministry, which consisted of somebody saying, \'93Mike, you know what you\rquote re doing, there\rquote 
s the forms, get out there and do it.  Make sure that you keep a carbon copy of everything that you do.\'94  They said form As do this form Bs do this, and that was it. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Were you familiar with the forms? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 They were absolutely horrendous [EMPHASIS].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 How did you deal with that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Basically, speaking to the other vets 
who were there at the time, you know, and saying, you know, what do you do, and this and that and whatever [PAUSE]  and again [EMPHASIS]  communications were a real problem.  They had one phone line for vets phone back in on.  I argued with them, and said
, look I\rquote ll [EMPHASIS] get the GPO and I\rquote ll get them in here, and they said, \'93oh you can\rquote t do that you\rquote ve got to go through the proper channels\'94, I said, \'93stuff the proper channels we\rquote 
ll just get them in and sort that out afterwards.\'94
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So a very frustrating time?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Very frustrating.  I think my worst moment was when we had a meeting of all the team, there was a briefing meetings, and there was a briefing meeting of TVIs and at the end of the day if you were there you went.  After Nick Bro
wn stood up and he said he was going to slaughter everything in Cumbria, that was in 3 kilometres. He meant it. He meant it.  Cattle, sheep, pigs, everything in 3 kilometres [PAUSE]  and there were dead bodies everywhere. There were twelve report cases th
at farmers had phoned in saying, we think we\rquote ve got foot and mouth, we\rquote d like a vet to see it, and there weren\rquote t any vets to go and see them [PAUSE]  and then Nick Brown stands up and says he\rquote 
s going to slaughter all the rest of these animals, and I argued quite passionately I think is the word, in that meeting, with the DVM that he couldn\rquote t get the report cases in, he couldn\rquote 
t get the animals that were ill, slaughtered, he couldn\rquote t get rid of the disposed, so how [EMPHASIS]  was he going to get these ones d
one, you know [PAUSE]  and his [EMPHASIS] response was, the Minister has said it so we will carry it out, and I very nearly thumped him [PAUSE].  I was completely wound up.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And then of course. . . .  
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well it wasn\rquote t going  to happen, apparently the other thing is, that night, the local vets also rang round, and there was a\'85 we put our view forward that it was not going to go [PAUSE]  and that\rquote 
s when J S was due to come up to discuss the situations.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And that\rquote s when he realised the scale? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 That\rquote s when he realised the scale.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par So what do you think should have happened?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 The problem is, is that the Ministry of Agriculture is very\'85 The State Veterinary Service is very [EMPHASIS] very centralised, and power is in London, and they wouldn\rquote 
t let it go [PAUSE].  They [EMPHASIS] had the computer systems in place from the previous out-break of swine fever,  the previous autumn, so they were almost up and running for [EMPHASIS]   that, and they thought, \'93oh we can run it from London.\'94
  The problem with that sort of situation, power has to be taken [EMPHASIS]   back down, you know.  If it\rquote s never given back down [EMPHASIS]  it has to be taken, and people who have been put in charge in Carlisle have been put there because they
\rquote re a safe pair of hands and they\rquote re not going to do that, they are not going to rock the boat.  So what should have happened is [EMPHASIS] as soon as they realised\'85 
\par 
\par [DISTURBED BY SON ENTERING THE ROOM].
\par 
\par Where were we?
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Talking about local control.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Yes, it should have come back to local control, but they wouldn\rquote 
t delegate that [PAUSE]   and even further, I think they were trying to run the whole of Cumbria, Newcastle, Bishop Auckland, Durham from Carlisle, and again, that should have been dissolved down earlier on.  The d
ecision should have been made from a local area.  Later on I was involved\'85
 I was on report cases until it moved through Wigton and once things got up and running and there were enough vets and whatever, I went on  to surveillance and was in charge of Longt
own surveillance, and tried to organise that [PAUSE]    and then went to the protection zone lifting, you know, all form Ds, the rings, trying to get those removed as quickly as possible and get Cumbria farming.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 If you go back to the early days, how were you received on farms?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Most of the early ones were either report cases where somebody phoned up or they were sort of tracings where, you know, they had animals that at Longtown or something like that.  And yes they were nervous, they were whatever.  I hav
e an ability to talk as this tape is probably showing, and I can communicate with Cumbrian farmers and I usually win people\rquote 
s confidence quite easily, and I also have a bit more age about me than some of the younger TVIs, and experience.  You know, if you\rquote re a large animal vet, you know, you know what you\rquote re talking about.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 What was your personal feelings\rquote , say if you were going onto a farm where foot and mouth is confirmed and you know that the next stage is going to be a cull, what was that like for you personally?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 There\rquote s always the feeling of dread as you go to look at the animal, and there\rquote s also that horrible [EMPHASIS] thing of, that you cannot diagnose foot and mouth, that\rquote s Page Street in London\rquote 
s job.  So you have to ring up Page Street like some six year old little boy and say what you\rquote 
ve found, fill in their horrendous forms and then discuss it with somebody in London who may of never seen foot and mouth, may not even be a large animal practitioner, is probably not [EMPHASIS] a large animal clinician, and you\rquote 
re trying to say, actually yes it is, or no it isn\rquote t.  In the early days I didn\rquote t have much problem with Page Street but in the late days I had real arguments with Page Street and went ballistic with them on occasions. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Do you mean in terms of diagnosis or in terms of paperwork?}{\f0\insrsid8722323  
\par 
\par What really, really annoyed me was, I was a second opinion on a case, I wanted to take samples because it was non typical, there was an oddball virus going through, that I heard it was not [EMPHASIS] typical of foot
 and mouth disease, there was a lot of talk that the sheep were showing odd signs, there were cattle showing odd signs, was what I wanted to know, I wanted to take samples, I wanted to know the results of those samples, and they wouldn\rquote 
t do it [PAUSE] you know, and I had to decide there and then, are you slaughtering this herd out because it\rquote 
s got an oddball virus going through it, everybody else has got foot and mouth, black as it is, this is foot and mouth, or do I walk away and come back again, you know,
 when there are more cows ill, showing more odd signs.  I still think, I am still of the opinion that the Ministry, the Chief Veterinary Officer is going against the professional ethics of The Royal College, in saying that we are not allowed to set up or 
be aware of a second opinion levels to take samples, and I think the Royal College representatives have been very remiss in terms of its treatment of the CVO [Chief Veterinary Officer] and the whole government, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So were there times when you felt de-professionalised?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Not totally.  I\rquote m a cog in a machine.  The thing is, diagnosis for that   disease, in its classical form, is not [EMPHASIS]   difficult.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 It is quite straightforward is it?}{\f0\insrsid8722323  
\par 
\par Yes.  If they\rquote ve got classical foot and mouth disease, you know, the farmers knew [EMPHASIS and PAUSE].  Ok, if they\rquote ve had low doses of virus and it\rquote s mild, or it\rquote s not classical presentation, or it\rquote 
s a single animal, yes maybe there\rquote s an argument there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Or there\rquote s a lot of anxiety and the cattle got lacerations in their mouths and they just needed you to come out because there is a big fear?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Yes.  There\rquote s plenty of case when I went to see, and yes, they were chewing something, don\rquote t worry about it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So what were you doing with all this frustration and anger?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 It\rquote s still there to a certain extent.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 I mean how was it affecting you in terms of your health and things like sleeping and eating patterns?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well in the early days, remember I was working long hours.  I mean there were some days when I didn\rquote t finish till two in the morning and I was back down at seven.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So what was this doing to you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 The thing is you can do it for a month on the adrenalin, you know, you can live on the adrenalin.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Well you can but it\rquote s not good is it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Yes, but [LONG PAUSE] at the time it was, you know, you just do it [PAUSE].  But I found the frustration of dealing with the Ministry the hardest thing [PAUSE],  and the farmers are the same, you know, just stupid bureaucracy.  They
\rquote re running it by computer and if you happen to get the boxes ticked wrongly, or you know, whatever.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 But in terms of your long days and dealing with a lot of frustration and anger, what was happening with your family?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I didn\rquote t see a lot of the kids [PAUSE] but [EMPHASIS AND PAUSE]   you know [PAUSE]   I think they found it hard as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Did they understand?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well they knew what was going on, there was pyres all round us, we live out in the country.  There was a pile of dead sheep outside our backdoor for two weeks.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And you had farming neighbours so how was that for you, as a neighbour, I mean were they aware that you were working for Defra?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well while I was working for Defra and I had animals, they didn\rquote t come any where [EMPHASIS] near me, which, yes, I understand.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 How was that for you, I mean are you normally quite neighbourly?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Um [PAUSE]  yes, we\rquote d stop and chat and whatever, but, you know, nobody [EMPHASIS]  was coming out of their farms.  Nobody [EMPHASIS] was stopping and chatting, you know, there was no [EMPH
ASIS] traffic on the roads, you know, the farmers where hunkered down, so life stopped.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So there probably wasn\rquote t time for a social life and even if there was, was there one to be had?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well yes, I\rquote ve got a lot of friends in Carlisle and Wigton who are non farming circle and we\rquote ve carried on. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 But there wasn\rquote t time in the initial stages.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 And obviously you\rquote re just tired.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Did you actually feel quite up tight?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 You go through phases. When you\rquote re trying to sort of change something in the Ministry\rquote s policy
 or something like that [PAUSE]  or, you know, [PAUSE],  like in the early days one of the things I would always do was go and speak to the epidemiologists and tell them what was going on, because they would receive the information. Because if you were a 
vet you would go out and slaughter something, go and sort it all out, come back, write your reports, put your reports in, so the epidemiologists would find out five or six days after it happened [PAUSE], well it\rquote 
s old news.  That got sorted out.  I would go in, because I would be in touch with G, one of the vets here, you know, and I told them, you know, we\rquote re losing it, it\rquote s gone down the whole of the Solway coast, you know, it\rquote 
s gone in the wind, you get single animals, there\rquote s farms in that place there, you know, they\rquote ve gone down, you know, you\rquote ve completely lost it.  I remember speaking to them and they said, well we haven\rquote 
t heard of any of these cases, I said well you wouldn\rquote t have yet, they\rquote re still being slaughtered, and whatever, as we talk.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So even local communication wasn\rquote t good?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Oh there was a real [EMPHASIS] block between what was going on, on the ground at Carlisle, then there was another block between Carlisle and Page Street, and there was another block between Page Street and the Cabinet Off
ice [LONG PAUSE].  You know, Tony Blair asked the Cabinet, is it going well lads?  Yes it\rquote s all under control, you know.  I don\rquote 
t think Tony Blair realised what was going on until he came up [LONG PAUSE].  It was interesting talking to John Snow at that time, because\'85  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 When he came up? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 When he came up, because he was saying nobody in London knows what\rquote s going on.  He said it\rquote s a long way for journalists to come up here, and it\rquote 
s a long way for politicians to come up here.  I mean, even now the TV programmes and things tends to feature Devon, Wales, you know, whereas, you know, it\rquote s not often that Cumbria comes up and yet half the cases were in Cumbria.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 There are lots of lay theories about the spread of foot and mouth in Cumbria, do you have your own personal view?
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par My view, which is probably controversial, the virus is stable in any temperature as long as it\rquote s stable, it doesn\rquote t like variations in temperature, Fs in S stood for 
ten or twelve days from getting the virus, two hundred cattle producing huge [EMPHASIS]  amounts of virus and there was a North East wind from Longtown with snow and cold, it was frosty, so I don\rquote t know whether you\rquote 
ve ever been in a cattle shed but cattle 
breathe out and immediately form droplets, which go up out through the roof and freeze, so basically you then get packets of frozen virus, which is quite stable because once its frozen the temperature is stable at minus one to nought degrees, that wind th
at came down the Solway coast.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 I was going to say, you can track it can\rquote t you?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 You can track it down from that North East wind, and it came [EMPHASIS] in packets.  So a lot of the early seeding cases were either in sheep outside, or in individual animals that were facing that direction.  Now I know they\rquote 
ve done a lot of work to try and figure out how it spread and whatever, but that is that is my view of how it spread down the Solway, and the thing is once it\rquote s seeded out, you know, once one person got
 it, it just knocked on and knocked on.  So there was a lot of different ways of how it spread but the initial spread was from the pigs to the sheep, from the sheep to the different markets.  Longtown Mart has a big layerage, it got through into the layer
age, it was in the layerage, the sheep were stressed, they produced lots of virus.  Market work then took it to the various farms around Longtown, the sheep took it to various places, Devon, Cornwall and onwards. Maybe that snow was important, maybe it
\rquote s not, but, you know, then local spread.  A lot [EMPHASIS] of the early pyres were made by TVIs who had never made anything like this before, there was very little in the way of guidelines or anything.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 You\rquote re saying that you could cut down the smoke levels or the way they burn or..?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I think the early pyres were poorly made.  A lot of the animals were not stuck [ stabbed] to release the gas, so therefore what you\rquote re wanting is an initial sharp burn so the virus is killed, but some of them didn\rquote 
t burn too well.  The other thing is, because the cattle weren\rquote t stuck to release the gases they were put on and heated up and they just burst and the contents went up in the air.  So there may be an issue there, I don\rquote t know. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 You know, the thing is, because the fires didn\rquote t burn down properly, you know, the foxes and whatever got out and pulled them around.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par And what about the burial of carcasses, what do you think of that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 My view is that every farm should have burial sites organised for enough animals on that farm so that if there is ever an outbreak \'85
 because there is a lot of concentration of foot and mouth disease but there are other things that could  be a problem.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Do you see any problems with soil or water contamination?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 There are issues to do with that, but if you had planned burial site that was approved by the Environment Agency and they said what you were suppose to do to ensure that it didn\rquote t get into them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Presumably you\rquote re talking about fairly manageable in terms of size?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 That\rquote s it, you know.  If you bury twenty in this field, twenty in the next field, twenty in the next field, it\rquote s not a problem.  It\rquote 
s when you bury four million or is it two million at Great Orton you start to have\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 I was going to say, do you have particular worries about ground water?  I\rquote m thinking about Great Orton, there are a lot of underground rivers and water causeways aren\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Yes but, it\rquote s being managed by\'85 have you met the guy that\rquote s doing the management  ?  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Yes. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 It\rquote s quite impressive, and the other thing is, what they\rquote re doing is that they\rquote re draining water into the site, so therefore all the water drains into the site and it\rquote 
s then treated so the water from surroundings drains into it, so therefore nothing\rquote s going to drain out of it because they\rquote re already draining water into it.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So is this water removed?   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 No it\rquote s treated.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So it\rquote s recycled?
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par Well I don\rquote t know what they\rquote re doing with it at the moment but they were hoping to build a treatment plant on site, but they were tankering it down to Workington for treatment, there\rquote s a treatment site there.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Where it would then be recycled?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Well, I think it then goes out to the North Sea.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 What about the whole cleaning up process, I\rquote m particularly thinking about disinfectant.  I know some farmers talked about vercon for example. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 The thing about vercon and a lot of the disinfectants, they\rquote re actually quite safe in that, you use too much and the first thing you get is an acid burn.  You do feel it so therefore it\rquote s not something that\rquote 
s insidious, if you have too much you know about it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Do you think it was effective?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 
I have strong views about cleaning up.  I have strong views on the cleaning up. If you look on the OIE website, which is like the World Health Organisation for vets, foot and mouth virus can persist in bedding and hide in other places, in infected doses i
t doses for up to\'85
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Right.
\par 
\par   }{\f0\insrsid8722323 That\rquote s if you do nothing.  This is a fragile virus, change the temperature change the PH, it\rquote 
s dead.  If you have it from infected animals, faeces will protect, you know, organic matter will protect it from disinfectants, but [EMPHASIS] no muck, no virus.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Ok.  So you\rquote ve got to clean it up, from the cracks and crevasses. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Or [EMPHASIS]   you leave it for a month.  Most of the farms around here\'85 it\rquote s twelve months ago and they\rquote re still having problems getting the Ministry to
 sign them off.  You know, the level of cleaning is totally ridiculous.  You need something like five grams of fresh [EMPHASIS]  material, is enough to protect a virus from an outside spray, so if you put an aerosol spray over it, it will protect it.

\par 
\par [TAPE TURN OVER]
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So we were talking about a disinfectant.  My feeling there is that you\rquote re saying, if you leave it alone for a month\'85 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 It will be fine [PAUSE].   Right, if you pressure-wash out once, as most of the farmers}{\b\f0\insrsid8722323  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 would have done if you\rquote d just left them alone they would have done, but they\rquote 
ve spent what, a million pounds trying to clean up some of these farms.  A complete waste of time and a waste of money.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 We need to think about closing down soon so I would like to ask how you feel now, in terms of you personally\'85?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I\rquote m still not back on an even keel, and I don\rquote t think many people are.  You know, both the farmers that stayed in, didn\rquote 
t get foot and mouth, and were on tenter hooks waiting, and then had the frustration of dealing with the Ministry,
 and those who went out with foot and mouth and had all the hassle of dealing with the Ministry [PAUSE].  I think the disease is bad but I think dealing with the Ministry is almost as bad [PAUSE],  and the thing that the governments have forgotten is that
 disease control is done by the state on behalf of farmers or again, in human populations, disease control is done by the state on behalf of the population, and the whole view point of that has been lost in that it\rquote 
s a self perpetuating  bureaucracy  where the service say, we\rquote re [EMPHASIS] Maff,  we\rquote re [EMPHASIS] Defra, you know, we\rquote 
re [EMPHASIS]  doing this, you know, you are [EMPHASIS]  going to agree to this, and the whole dictatorial  emphasis from Page Street, you know [PAUSE]  it\rquote s just wrong [EMPHASIS AND PAUSE], and you know, there\rquote 
s a lot of South African vets who come across, who have just been amazed by the attitude of the whole of Defra.  They have forgotten that they we\rquote re doing it on behalf of the farmers. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 The other thing is, I think the Ministry to a certain extent is like any bully, if you stand up to them and tell them, no, they tent to back off, but the problem is, is that they just keep on like a grinding machine}{
\b\f0\insrsid8722323 .  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I don\rquote t know what the answer is.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Well I was going to say, in professional terms, what is the future for you within this profession?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 A lot depends on the future of agriculture [PAUSE]  for us, in this dairying area, it is two things.  How much work is the Ministry going to put our way and what is going to be the price of milk
 in order to pay the farmers to pay us?   We are still two vets down because people haven\rquote t restocked and we\rquote re not confident enough to take on more staff yet [PAUSE], maybe in eighteen months time.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 So the future is still quite fragile?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 And that causes concern?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 [LONG PAUSE] I don\rquote t know about concern [PAUSE]   opportunities [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Being positive.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Being positive.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 There is a lot I haven\rquote t asked you, but is there any thing in particular that you would really like to comment on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 It\rquote s funny actually, what you said about the kids, my middle son Tim has always been very keen on animals and vetting, you know, he used to come out with me on call and obviously when foot and mouth started he couldn\rquote 
t come, and then when everything started getting shot round and about, it did affect him and even now he doesn\rquote t want to be a vet anymore.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 How old is he? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 He\rquote s only young, he\rquote s nine.  It\rquote s sort of disillusioned him for what being a vet is. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Like a kick in the teeth?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 I think it is.  Part of me thinks would I work for the Ministry again next time or would I stay on the outside?  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Can you stay on the outside?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Oh I was a volunteer [PAUSE]  with 24 hours notice, as I pointed out on quite a few occasions [PAUSE]. But, you know, I think 
somebody had to. They needed vets in the early days and while I was doing good in there, I felt I should stay.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 It must have left you with a great raft of feelings.  Perhaps you\rquote re almost too close to it yet?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323 Probably [PAUSE].  You know, I think it\rquote s affected a lot of people in lots of different ways and I think the other thing is, is that talking to some of the farmers, it\rquote s crystallised a lot of their thinking and what they
\rquote re going to do in the future, whereas maybe they would have just carried on, now they are looking at other things. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 Particularly in Cumbria I suppose. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid8722323 [PAUSE]  well no I think generally, because there\rquote s a lot of Cumbrian farmers who have gone and bought whole herds, well they have bought a whole herd  off somebody else who is going to do something else}{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
.
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 M was thanked for his time 
\par }{\f0\insrsid8722323  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8722323 
\par 
\par }}