{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f46\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f49\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f50\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f52\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f53\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1932076\rsid10843891\rsid13505170\rsid15546247}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\title I would like to start by asking you to tell me a little bit about yourself, your background and your family}{\author Sandra Catherine Hudson}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr16\min33}{\version3}{\edmins0}{\nofpages24}{\nofwords5558}{\nofchars31682}{\*\company Packard Bell NEC}{\nofcharsws37166}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot1932076 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid13505170 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13505170 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13505170 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid13505170 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid13505170 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid1932076 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid13505170 
\par Interview ID:  PM09}{\insrsid13505170 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs19\insrsid13505170 PAGE  
}}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid10843891 5}}}{\cs19\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid13505170 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\ul\insrsid13505170 Date of Interview: }{\f0\ul\insrsid1932076 26/02/02}{\f0\ul\insrsid13505170 
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Date of birth: 1981
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid13505170 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid13505170 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid13505170  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid13505170 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid13505170 Geographic region: North Cumbria}{\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i\f0\insrsid13505170 
C lives with her boyfriend and a large black and tan collie cross who was very excited to see me.  They live in a small link house on the edge of a village.  When I arrived}{\i\f0\insrsid1932076 ,}{\i\f0\insrsid13505170 
 R was also present and as C was happy about this}{\i\f0\insrsid1932076 ,}{\i\f0\insrsid13505170  we continued. }{\i\f0\insrsid1932076  }{\i\f0\insrsid13505170 At times R contri
buted to the conversation.  We sat in a small living room with patio doors leading out to a square of lawn, beyond which were fields and the outline of local fells.  The TV was playing in the corner but had been turned town and opposite the sofa where I s
at with C, some goldfish swam around a large rectangular tank.  Just  to the left of this}{\i\f0\insrsid1932076 ,}{\i\f0\insrsid13505170 
 a writing bureau was open and books and writing material spread on its worktop. R was sitting on a hard chair making notes from these materia}{\i\f0\insrsid1932076 s}{\i\f0\insrsid13505170  but as the interview pr
ogressed he came closer to C and I, sitting on the remaining easy chair and joining in. }{\b\i\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
I would like to start by asking you to tell me a little bit about your-self, your background and your family.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I was born in South Africa, I\rquote m not from here originally but my gran, mam and dad are from Rochdale, and my brother as well, so I moved back here when I was about thirteen, so I\rquote 
ve only been here about seven or eight year, quite a big change really.  My dad still lives in South Africa and my brother and his wife and my nephew, and they\rquote ve just had a little niece, they live in Australia, so we\rquote 
ve spread out all over the place, and then my mam and my gran live here.  
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
So you were in South Africa with your family and your brother?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par He\rquote s in Australia now.  Just, bringing the little kids up is probably a bit safer there than it is in South Africa.  They\rquote ve been there about a year and a half now.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So there is you and your brother, but at the moment there\rquote s just you and your mum here is that right? 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\noline\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid13505170 And my gran.   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Your mum is local is she?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, she lives in Carlisle with my gran.   She used to work nights and everything so it\rquote s better for her really.  They just live in D, so it\rquote s not far away.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par And your partner?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I\rquote m here  [PARTNER R SPEAKS NOW]
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So you\rquote re local are you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I\rquote m from two miles down the road there, just at the Wigton road turn off.  There\rquote s a farm there and there\rquote s two tied houses beside it and I was brought up in the first one.   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Are your parents still there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
No.  It was my mum, my grandpa and my gran used to live there, and my mum got remarried when I was about ten and we moved into Carlisle and then I moved back out again to live with my auntie, but she moved from Kuwait and got a house next door to granddad
.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par 
\par So you\rquote ve both got a bit of a history behind you haven\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I\rquote ve mostly been here all my life really.  I went to C School.  I go to my granddad\rquote s every weekend, even before I lived here.
\par Granddad kind of brought me up really.  He\rquote s been here since 1952, he moved from Scotland.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So neither of you have got farming background?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SAYS]  No.   [R SAYS]  Yes.  [K SAYS]  Oh yes, well I haven\rquote t.    [R SAYS] Granddad\rquote s been a farm worker till he was seventy something.  He moved actually to the house when it was first built, I think in July 21}{
\f0\super\insrsid13505170 st}{\f0\insrsid13505170  1952.  I remember it because that\rquote s my birthday.  He moved down here with my gran and my auntie, and then my mum was born down there.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So how long have you lived here?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]   Two and a half years. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And that\rquote s together? }{\f0\insrsid13505170  
\par 
\par Yes. Before that we lived on a caravan site just on the other side of Wigton road.  We had static there for about a year.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So when you came over did you go to school here?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Was that quite strange?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, because I hadn\rquote t done French or anything.  You learn all the other languages over there so I had to be put back a year, which I didn\rquote t like, because you come in with a different accent and you\rquote 
re different so I got put back a year, so I didn\rquote t really like school that much.  I used to get on all right and that but towards the end of school that\rquote s when I got my ME, last year really.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So were you doing GCSEs?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, it was sort of the fourth year that I really started missing school and stuff like that, and then you know, you go to the doctors but there\rquote 
s no actual test or stuff like that, so you got people at school saying you just don\rquote t want to go and stuff like that, but then eventually we got it all sorted and everything and I got diagnosed.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So were you about sixteen when you were diagnosed?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, something like that [PAUSE],   but I managed to get entered for half of my GCSEs in the end.  I just went for a part time timetable, that\rquote 
s all I could manage really.  So I managed to get them.  So I think about five altogether.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 That\rquote s impressive, but does that mean that you\rquote ve not worked?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes. I had a Saturday job and holiday work and all that but then when I got the ME I couldn\rquote 
t really carry on with that, so apart from then, no, I had to stay off.  I had a year sort of off because I was having blackouts and so I needed to go for tests, that\rquote s why I\rquote m doing my driving test now because I wasn\rquote 
t allowed to drive really.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So really your ME restricted you. So what is it like now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Well now I can manage my day a bit more.  I know how much I can do and if I rush myself a little bit I know how to kind of deal with it now.  You get very achy and you start to get a bit irritable then, you know.  When I\rquote 
d sort of go to school full time, it would get to the Wednesday and I\rquote d be really tired and couldn\rquote t get up and all that sort of thing.  Some days I just had to lie in bed all day, but it\rquote s got a lot better since then, because I
\rquote m learning to drive and I\rquote m doing the studying slowly because I missed out a year.  At one point you didn\rquote t even like want to go up town or anything like that, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So you\rquote re back into your studies now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes.  I\rquote m just doing a night course in A level archaeology, I finish in June.  But now that I\rquote ve got back into that and I\rquote m getting my car as well, so I\rquote 
m going to try and go back to Carlisle College in the day and try and get the rest of my A levels.  That\rquote s why the past year I\rquote ve moved on the most because we moved out here and I\rquote ve been doing education again and all that, and I
\rquote m starting to enjoy it now.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So you were starting to turn the corner and then last year foot and mouth struck.  When it hit the news did you think it was going to affect you personally?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Well I suppose you hear about it, because it wasn\rquote t in Great Orton or anything at first, so you hoped it wouldn\rquote t get here.  I think at first it\rquote s like one of them things you watch on the news and then you don
\rquote t realise how serious it is, especially with me not knowing the farming and all that.  I think that R kind of knew it was a bit more serious, but I didn\rquote t really have much idea, but then I think\'85 I don\rquote 
t even think there was very much foot and mouth in the area when the burial site was meant to come up.  So that was a bit of a shock because they were dumping them all there, but they say it wasn\rquote 
t really that infected eh.  You know, you thought they would have done it further away from this area. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So can you remember when they started the disposal site?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [LONG PAUSE]   I can\rquote t remember the actual time it was, but you can remember when they started doing it, you know.  We actually first heard on the news that it was going to be there but we didn\rquote 
t know anything about it really.  You just hear Great Orton, you know, you don\rquote t hear that on the news often, you know, so you\rquote re looking on the news and that, and you see the windmills  but you couldn\rquote 
t get away from the fact that they were doing it there, you\rquote d see all the trucks and everything.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And what about your neighbours, were you quite friendly with them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes sort of.  Well we keep our selves\'85 Well we\rquote re not actually keeping in the village, but in the block really you all get on with your own.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par But when the news broke that there was going to be a burial site here, were  there any protests or anything like that going on in the village?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [R SPEAKS]  There was only us and there was only the people from the shop or the people in the pub that really spoke about it, nobody else seemed to care or if they did they didn\rquote t do nout about it so\'85 
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  They were worried about it but didn\rquote t think they\rquote d be able to do anything about it I think.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]   Except we rang the water board up one day. 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  Yes, except there were a few problems with the water. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  Full of chlorine. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS] For a while we used to have to test it first before you did anything with it.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par  I\rquote m just trying to get a picture of what it must have been like living here  at the time when there were lots of carcasses coming through?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I think, you\rquote d look out this window if you was sitting in and you\rquote d see them coming up, and they\rquote d sometimes turn round, because they only [EMPHASIS]  did the one way system, they didn\rquote 
t do that from the beginning.  [R SPEAKING]  No they didn\rquote t, because my granddad lives up the other end of the road basically and he used to see them coming up and then down and around, and then they\rquote d go up that way, towards W, or they
\rquote d go that [EMPHASIS]  way, because you can get there through the flats and up that way.  And another thing was that sometimes you couldn\rquote t go anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So what was the worst bit about the movement of the carcasses?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SPEAKS] I think it was just the smell.
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS] It was a sickly smell. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS] Because you used to see them coming back empty and you knew exactly where they were and what had been dumped.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par But when you say empty, were they not sealed?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par No. [R SPEAKS] no they weren\rquote t sealed.  They say they were sealed but it was tarpaulin stretched over them very tightly and you could even see the shapes.  You could see the trailer on the truck was a bit wobbly and you don\rquote 
t get that from a straight tarpaulin, so they weren\rquote t exactly\'85  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS] You could sometimes see them  through the gaps.
\par 
\par   [R SPEAKS]  we don\rquote t exactly know how many arrived.  At first Brigadier said nine hundred thousand and then Defra  said it was five hundred thousand. 
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  Yes, it seems to have gone down, you know, because we went to a couple of the meetings at the village hall and that, and it was always changing the information.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So there were public meetings?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I think there was three altogether and I went to two of them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And was that Defra?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Yes, it was people from all sorts; it was the environment agency, the police\'85 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  it was the maff lot, it was the first one.  None of them very informative.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 What was the mood in these meetings?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SPEAKS]  I think all the residents were quite annoyed, you know, because you didn\rquote t know what was going on and then they come back and say well we\rquote ve done this don\rquote t worry it is [EMPHASIS] all safe, and we\rquote 
d say, well why didn\rquote t you inform us first, you know.  Or it was all, sorry we know to do differently next time but we\rquote ve done it now.  So that was kind of the attitude from them.  I know they were trying to explain everything but it didn
\rquote t change the fact that everyone was annoyed with them, you know they have to put them somewhere but it\rquote s just the way they went about it.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So in terms of your everyday life, you both said about you couldn\rquote t go anywhere, do you want to say a bit more about that and how that affected you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes I think so, because we both like\'85
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  I like getting out, it\rquote s like being in a prison sitting in the house, I hate it. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Well you\rquote ve both got existing health problems anyway.}{\f0\insrsid13505170  
\par 
\par  Well I find it hard to actually get out the door sometimes, you know.    Couldn\rquote t get past the lonning. Couldn\rquote t even go anywhere on my mountain bike. 
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  You went down the road but then you kinda had to jump in the ditches for the wagons, you know, because they didn\rquote t go the slowest.  I mean because at the meetings they did try and say to them\'85  especially past the school at dinne
r time and that\'85 go slow, but they didn\rquote t really did they? 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  personally for me that was terrible.  I mean it was [EMPHASIS]  awful.  Because it was my little life line, it\rquote s just now that I\rquote ve got insured on the car but there\rquote s not really that 
many places to go apart from the public footways, but when they are all closed, you\rquote ve only got the road, so the best thing that you can do is go with the dog around the block or to the notice board, and even then, you know, you\rquote 
d jump out of the way of a truck or you\rquote re standing in like dodgy looking liquid [PAUSE],  because the drains would be overflowed down that road. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  And that definitely happened for you did it?  You were very aware of that?  
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SPEAKS]  Yes.  It was quite worrying. You were a bit paranoid.   
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  I was quite worried because, what it was, the first week they said they were testing the possibility of it being carried in the water and then secondly they said that they couldn\rquote t possibly do that because they didn\rquote 
t have the means.  
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  they could only test for certain things, not some other things.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  They can only screen it for certain things but not for the foot and mouth virus, and you know fine well that when you\rquote ve had rain such as this\'85 I mean they\rquote r
e not that far above the water table anyway.  I mean I know that they say that they\rquote re all concrete lined anyway, but the first one that they\rquote d actually dug isn\rquote t lined.  The biggest pit isn\rquote 
t lined, it just a big hole, because you seen it on the news and they were filling them in, there was no concrete or anything there [PAUSE].  There was a bit of lime  there but that was for decomposing bodies I would say, but that was it.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  You know it\rquote s meant to be clear soil and that, but you just\'85
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So K, what was the worst bit for you K at that point?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I think it was, you know, also because you don\rquote t want to take\'85 Either you step out your front door and see everything or you smell everything, so I think you tend to just sit in, or If you couldn\rquote t go anywhere you
\rquote d go out in your back garden but you can still smell everything, it was terrible, you know, you just have to sit in really.  It\rquote s not like you could get in the car and go to Carlisle or somewhere else, you know, because we only go up town
 once a week, we get a lift. 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]   That\rquote s were we live there, that\rquote s our house there, that\rquote s the airfield, that\rquote s were all the trenches are, if you look, even on the map, or on the streams, they don\rquote 
t just stop at underground streams you see, and there\rquote s hundreds of them, there is more than there is on the map, there\rquote s hundreds of them drainage systems, channels and everything.  I mean that home there, doesn\rquote 
t mean the home of anyone, it means liable to flooding.   So the whole area\rquote s really liable to flooding all the time and it always has been.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  because I know when we went to the first meeting I think the residents were quite shocked because we said to them about underground streams, you know, and they seemed to recognise there were 
some but they thought there were only a couple, you know.  But even if you look on there you think\'85 Well the farmers used to say there\rquote s a stream down the back of mine and you haven\rquote 
t been testing that, you know.  The farmers seemed to know more that way than the environment agency, and I know they could be testing some things but you need to keep an eye on everything really. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  It\rquote s not really a beck, it more of a drain channel kind of beck and this  [GRANDFATHER CLOCK CHIMES DROWNED OUT SPEECH]  they all just think it stops there but it doesn\rquote t, it goes on the other side and underneath.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par So was this affecting your everyday health like sleeping and eating?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Well sometimes eating and [EMPHASIS] sleeping.  I mean the trucks, the noise\'85
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS
]  Because I mean even if you stay up towards the night they would stop but you see them sort of lying dead and you could see all the flashing lights and that.  Because they said it was an escort going through, and they said it was just machinery, but you
 kinda think\'85 Yes.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And it disturbed you anyway, whatever it was.}{\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par Yes, you know, and you could hear the trucks, because you could hear them rattling and everything, you know.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  And then when we take the dog out, I mean most of the time it would be on a night, and you could hear them windmills.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  And then when they were actually killing the animals you could hear some of them\'85
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]   Well you could hear the generators going all night and you\rquote d know well what was going on.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  Because even though\'85 Because with the pub and everything it\rquote s kind of masked off, you can\rquote t see anything, but you could still get the picture really. 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS] Sort half a mile in a straight line as the crow flies from the actual burial place, eh.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Can you remember how long this went on for you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 It was a long time. In the end it become normal.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  because the lonnings  only opened recently.  They say there is only meant to be two affluent trucks a week or something but there does seem to be a lot more than that, you know.  Especially when it rains, you know\'85 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Taking the effluence away.}{\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par Yes.   [R SPEAKS]  I don\rquote t think anyone really knows in the village where the hell it goes.  I mean it did go to Whitehaven. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  It\rquote s all very hazy what was been\'85 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  And also there was some-thing on the news about someone dumping in\'85 there was sort of two sites in Cumbria and they\rquote d been done for dumping in the Solway.  Well I mean that\rquote 
s just a stones throw away from the Solway where they are.   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par What about friends and family, were they still coming through?  Do they come through?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]  Yes. Well your auntie\'85 it wasn\rquote t far for her to come and your granddad and that.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par And they were still coming through?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 She\rquote s two miles away, so\'85 But with my mum and that, they haven\rquote t got transport, but you know, with friends coming to visit you\rquote d be coming through all ways and it would be blocked off. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  Like my friend James, he lives in Carlisle and I\rquote d follow him but whichever way I\rquote d go\'85
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  yes and it would be blocked off, and you know, sometimes if you were expecting people, you didn\rquote t know, because they didn\rquote t inform you whether it was going to be blocked off, it was just kind of a guess. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  The lack of information, to me that was what the worrying thing was.  It was like a test site.  It makes you think of the X files, you know, in about fifteen years time, what our kids will be doing.  They\rquote 
ll have like four arms, you know, like the X men do [PAUSE].  You don\rquote t know.   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Do you think that\rquote s the sense in the community?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS] I think it\rquote s worrying about the health issues because you don\rquote t\'85  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  I think most people in the community to be honest with you,  they really just want to put it to the back of their minds, especially the farmers that make up a lot of the council.  They\rquote re
 the people that are supposed to be informing you of these things, but I mean some of them couldn\rquote t leave their own property.  Saying that, there\rquote s no defence for the village council at all, eh. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  they have telephones.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  They didn\rquote t have [EMPHASIS] to go out of the house.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  because people were very annoyed because they saw the council and they hadn\rquote t informed you about anything, I think they expected the parish council to go and sort that\'85
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS] The parish still managed [EMPHASIS] to send out stuff for the church, but they didn\rquote 
t really send any information, at all [EMPHASIS], about anything, not even the meetings and that was for the people here , that was supposed to be one of the more important meetings as well. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS] As you say, on the notice board you used to see meetings but it wasn\rquote t actually for us it was for all the other sort of cases.  They seemed to be doing a lot more than we were actually. 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]   Another annoying point was that we\rquote re here [PAUSE] under Carlisle, and across the road is Alllerdale, so we are getting\'85
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 You\rquote re getting different councils.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes.  You\rquote re like, one says one thing, and one says the other and you\rquote re like, well where do you stand [PAUSE].  And plus we\rquote re Great
 Orton, where the actual site is at Great Orton airfield not anywhere else.  I mean I can remember going up there as a little kid going up there playing there and now it\rquote 
s not there.  I mean we used to go up there for barbeques in the summer.  [K SPEAKS]  Yes, it\rquote s where I had my first driving experience.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 What\rquote s actually happening in that airfield now, is it just completely cordoned off to the public?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [R SPEAKS]  I\rquote ve been down on my mountain bike, that was after [EMPHASIS] it was supposed to be kinda wrapped up, but I couldn\rquote t get up anywhere.  I mean I went down that way, I couldn\rquote 
t turn right towards the airfield, carried on out past Thornby way and didn\rquote t notice anything really apart from every single farm had a big sign on, you know, closed due to foo
t and mouth [PAUSE]  carried on, and then on my way back there was all these like no entry signs at the bottom of that road, but we\rquote re facing that [EMPHASIS] way, so you can\rquote t see them as you\rquote 
re going that way.  You go along that way and you can\rquote t get back, so I was stuck.  I couldn\rquote t go left, I couldn\rquote t go right, so I just had to go through one of them [PAUSE],  and that was on a mountain bike. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  There is still actually signs down there but I\rquote m not actually sure what they\rquote re for [PAUSE].  I think they\rquote re for single file traffic and stuff like that, but that\rquote s where all the signs were, you know, you\rquote 
re not really sure. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  They say they weren\rquote t burning anything round here but I know definitely [EMPHASIS]  the
y were burning.  If you go up by Orton Rigg and you carry on out that way, that road that we were on today testing the car out, there was a big pit with stretched tarpaulin over it and weighted down with}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 hard}
{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 -core}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 rubble, you know [PAUSE], and you could smell when you went past it. 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  And also the women from W who I sat next to at the meeting, she was saying they had five or six pyres and that, but we were told here that they weren\rquote t burning, you know [PAUSE],   but you were sure you could smell
 it, but then they were saying we\rquote re not burning, we promise, you know.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS] Well sometimes you could see\'85 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 The smoke?}{\f0\insrsid13505170  
\par 
\par  Well not even the smoke, you could actually see like [PAUSE], what\rquote s the word for it. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Like debris coming off.}{\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par Yes, you know like thin air when you burn paper, you know, it\rquote s like snow sort of thing. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 It\rquote s supposed to be animal skin etcetera? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 That would explain the smell.  That was only the one time, but the smell, even now sometimes, and if the winds blowing as it usually does from that way.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So were there other aspects of the foot and mouth outbreak that affected you, like have you got farming friends or do you know of people who went down?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SPEAKS]  I know people but not really to do with the farms. 
\par 
\par \{R SPEAKS]   E, his dad was my uncle\rquote s friend and I was his friend at school, and they say on the news that his farms got it.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  We used to watch the Border [local TV channel] news, you know, when they say how many cases they have, we used to watch that every day}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 .  It affected your granddad quite a bit didn\rquote t it R?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par \{R SPEAKS] Yes, that was probably the hardest thing about the whole thing.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Does your granddad remember the 67 out-break?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Did he talk about it?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Not very much.  He said then it was controllable; it wasn\rquote t as big as this.  Granddads house backs onto fields and his garden now, used to be the lonning  and they used to drive the cows through. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  Because how many cows were there?
\par 
\par   [R SPEAKS] There was a hundred and three but there used to be more, there was a hundred and twenty there then.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Were they dairy?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, the lot of them are.  I think it was upsetting really, because it was silent, eh.  Because they\rquote d camp there sometimes or we\rquote d camp there together, or sometimes I\rquote d stay at my aunties, but you\rquote 
d go out in the garden with the dog and the dog would go\'85 our older dog Jake, he used to go to the fence and he\rquote d stick his head through to the cows and then they\rquote d lick him and he\rquote d lick them back. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  I think it was upsetting for your auntie as well, because when they went out back they\rquote d see all the piles, you know, and they\rquote d been killed, you know, because she\rquote 
s quite sensitive really. You know, when you can see them, piles of animals left for a long time, you can see them sort of like up to road.  That was quite upsetting really, having to go back and forward, and they weren\rquote 
t moving them [PAUSE],   but you knew they were doing it as quick as they could.}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par That\rquote s like another smell isn\rquote t it? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes, and you see that as they were all lying, whereas they couldn\rquote t see that, they could just imagine, but when you actually drive past it and see the piles of animals.
\par 
\par   [R SPEAKS]  Well the sheep there, I mean the first burning I biked down there.  I can always remember it because it\rquote s quite strange.  I biked down and there was probably thirty odd sheep and I don\rquote 
t know how many more piled on top.  They were just piled on top of each other by the side of the gate there, and I biked down t
o granddads and I was like well, you know, not the nicest of smells either.  I think they had the white tent up and they were culling them and when I went down they were dead and there was hardly anything left.  The next time I went down, it was a week la
ter and they were still there only this time they had swelled up a bit, you know, the gases and everything, and it was another week, so it was a fortnight they\rquote 
d been there and then they got moved.  But the thing was, when I biked back up and looked in the field and stopped, and there were snowdrops coming through where the sheep were, and then they died when I was there, they were kind of fitting.  
\par [K SPEAKS] I mean it was nice to look because there was sheep all in these fields when you look out, it was a bit\'85
 you know, as soon as you found out, you know, you were looking everyday to see if they were still going to be there and then, you know, the sheep had been taken away.  
\par 
\par [R}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 SPEAKS]}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170   }{\f0\insrsid13505170 The worst was Granddads though I think, to me that was probably}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 the 
worst actual visual thing because, you know, you go past these sheep that were dead and you\rquote d see nothing in the field, and you\rquote 
ve got granddads family, they were quietly sat at the doorway, and mam picks us up, she comes out to see him every Saturday and we go for a meal there.  It just wasn\rquote 
t the same, because none of the machinery was going, because I mean sometimes you could hear them in the milking parlour banging away. No tractors, no munching or anything.  The strange thing was\'85 if you ever lived at Granddad\rquote s, you\rquote 
d sit there sometimes in the tent or in the caravan\'85 is that every night when you go to sleep, you can hear them munching.  The thing is with cows as well is they\rquote re not compassionate.  I mean when I was a little boy\'85 because as I say Grand
dad, the lonning is part of his garden now, they chopped a bit of his garden off and turned that into like a concrete patch\'85 but he used to put me on the back of a cow and sit on the back of it and ride to the end, and he\rquote 
d pick me off it and put me on another one and I\rquote d just keep on, you know\'85 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes I\rquote ve ridden cows.  I know what you\rquote re talking about.}{\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par Yes, and there was none there [PAUSE]  so that kind of affected me as well.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So it\rquote s almost something you took for granted and foot and mouth really sort of brought that up and it\rquote s a shock when they aren\rquote t there any more.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]  because it was a shock when we saw the animals out again because, you know, you\rquote d walk past and hear a noise and think, what\rquote s that, and it was just them in the field again [EMPHASIS] but you hadn\rquote 
t heard it for that long, you know, you kinda just started to get used it without them and it was nice to have them back. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS] Mind you, I will say one [EMPHASIS]   thing; there has been more lays of prey insects than any other year I can remember. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 A boom year for wild life isn\rquote t it.
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 When did things start picking off?
\par  
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]  I think well after they weren\rquote t dumping any animals obviously it got better.
\par 
\par   [R SPEAKS] Well I think basically when they stopped shouting about it on the news, because you\rquote d turn the news on it would be like a hundred odd different farms there and you were like well I know so and so
 from there, and you know, Granddad knew all the farms round here, so he\rquote d be thinking, well this farms gone down and so forth.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Presumably these are farms that he\rquote s probably worked on are they? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par Well he\rquote s worked at that one all his life but he knows all the other workers.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So for you personally, I was wondering about the future, because you seem to have quite a lot of concerns about health?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]  it\rquote s just because you know, especially since we\'85 because, you know, when we moved from the caravan, and when we got the opportunity of this house, it was like a relief, you know, you\rquote 
re going to be near granddad and everything, so we}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 planned to stay here and we would like to have kids and all that, and I know they say it\rquote s only a small risk, they say with birth defect\'85
 see that thing you hear all the time but there\rquote s nothing written down. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAK] It\rquote s a small risk, but what is a small risk.
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  That\rquote s what I mean, you\rquote ve got nothing written down 
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  There\rquote s an absolutely higher increase on the small risk}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 than there would be anywhere. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  Or they\rquote re not sure, well it maybe increase in the future as something else they\rquote re going to find.
\par 
\par   \{R SPEAKS]  They can\rquote t test it in the water, you know.  I w
ould like to know what will [EMPHASIS]  happen because, I know for a fact [EMPHASIS]   that some of it must of seeped out, because for a start there was disinfectant, and the day I went down to my friends, down by the golf course, well we\rquote 
d walk down by the river, he\rquote s got two Staffies and we used to take them out and we use to go and sit on these logs and just let the dogs go mad round the park, you know, they\rquote 
d be in the river and that, we use to follow them down the park, and there was just dead trout everywhere, just dead trout floating in the water.  I\rquote ve never seen that before, because usually you didn\rquote 
t see any [EMPHASIS] fish, never mind a dead fish. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Has it put you off settling here?
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 
\par [K SPEAKS]  I think if you hadn\rquote t  grown up in the area and everything, because there\rquote s connections to it.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS] My granddad lives here. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And your Granddad\rquote s a good age now, he would miss you.}{\f0\insrsid13505170   
\par 
\par Yes he\rquote s 81 now.  And my aunty is possibly thinking of moving as well and she lives next door to him, but she can\rquote t afford to keep the house, it\rquote s quite a large house and she initially bought it when my grandma died. 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  But I think, you know, I do like the area, because we used to live in Carlisle and I much prefer it out here, you know.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 It is a lovely area.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170  And the country sort of thing, we\rquote re not really town people. [DOG BARKING DROWNING OUT SPEECH]  It\rquote s what you\rquote re used to.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 And I suppose you might say, well why should we move?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170   [K SPEAKS]  Yes, you know, you\rquote re here now and you\rquote ve actually got somewhere where you like.  The chances of finding something like this again it would be very difficult, and it\rquote s a nice house and everything.  

\par 
\par [R SPEAKS] It was only like misfortune that we got the house in the first place, you know, [PAUSE]  because originally we were going to be living in B, but my landlord at the campsite didn\rquote 
t give me the letter so I was too late in replying and then they put me on their list and phoned me up, and I was kinda living at her mum\rquote s at the time. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 Yes it\rquote s a nice house, and close to the pub, is that not too noisy?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 No, it\rquote s never too noisy.  The only problem is sometimes you go in there and there\rquote s a great big bench, which I broke my ankle on.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 I was going to ask what happened to your foot}{\f0\insrsid13505170 . 
\par 
\par  [K SPEAKS]  Yes, I think that was last summer.  
\par 
\par [R SPEAKS]  I keep it on because it swells up a bit, but it\rquote s not bad at all any more really.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 So finally, is there anything personal or political you would like to say about the foot and mouth crisis?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 [K SPEAKS]  I think lack of information definitely.  Because even before they put the burial site the whole way through, even if they did find results and that, would they tell you or would they just sort of brush it away.  It
\rquote s kinda like we\rquote re only a small number of people around here, you know [PAUSE],   because when they use to show the burial site on the television, they\rquote d show you the windmills and that [PAUSE], but it\rquote s just you\rquote 
re so uncertain and anxious about everything and even in the future, just the whole way through lack of information, and when they showed you things on the television and it showed the burial  site and the windmills but they wouldn\rquote 
t show you that people lived near it.  It\rquote s like in the middle of nowhere I think people thought there weren\rquote t really people affected by it but they don\rquote t realise how close people are round it. }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{
\f0\insrsid13505170 You know, your life\rquote s still affected but you didn\rquote t think, you know, much was really done, and I know it was the bigger picture that everyone was worrying about, but li
ke even in the future, like you think, every few months they should be telling you how they\rquote re going, because you don\rquote t actually know, if you\rquote ve}{\b\f0\insrsid13505170  }{\f0\insrsid13505170 not been up to the burial site you don
\rquote t really have much idea.   I know at the meetings they explained to you they\rquote re building a wall round and all that, but you\rquote 
ve got no idea really whether to trust them, and when the information changes from meeting to meeting you start to kind of think well what can you believe.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 What about you R?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 My personal point would be probably [PAUSE]  the disturbance to my sort of shaky routine anyway, so I\rquote 
ve got to kind of hold my life all together as well as doing the University degree, open University albeit, which makes it that little bit harder because I don\rquote t speak to anyone, I do it all on my own.  So I\rquote 
d be sitting studying and next thing there would be six trucks going by [PAUSE],  and then I can\rquote t go out anywhere like I already explained, that was the worst thing, and then, you know, the lack of anything there [EMPHASIS].  That\rquote 
s from a personal point of view and the political side of things I really think it was a big mass balls-up to be honest, because no-one here knew anything about it until we seen it on the Border news.  I think in fact it was maybe J that rang me up, and 
he lives in C, saying have a look on the news, because he has been to the airfield with me and knew.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  I think it was his mam as well was sending messages through. 
\par 
\par  [R SPEAKS]  That\rquote s how we found out.  
\par 
\par [K SPEAKS]  It was all sort of watch the next newsr  [R SPEAKS]  and then the next thing you know they\rquote re there saying that they\rquote re only digging a certain amount of pits, and then they buy land off farmers, and then there\rquote 
s the six pitches or whatever. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 It is huge.  I think people have to see it to believe it.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid13505170 I think the lack of information from the parish, from the defra lot, from anyone.  The police even could have informed us of certain things, like with the roads and stuff [PAUSE].  Then there was the actual trucks themselves, that 
were a problem [PAUSE],  then they\rquote re saying about re-doing all of the drains and that\rquote s the\'85 the most thing for me, is the water system, because they are all open drains and if anything gets into the open drains that\rquote 
s all going to go back straight [EMPHASIS]  into the water table, just going to end up in water, people drink it round this area, everywhere. There\rquote s reservoirs that supply Manchester up here.   You wonder if it\rquote 
s just lying dormant, I mean, some of the farmers\'85 I\rquote m not really sure\'85 they were told to plough and plant crops and stuff before it was all over but we\rquote ve seen them ploughing and they\rquote 
re not suppose to do anything like [EMPHASIS]        that.  I mean they didn\rquote t even know what was going on either.  The farmers themselves had to find out off \lquote Country File\rquote  [TV programme], that\rquote 
s how they [EMPHASIS]  found out, because they were saying in the pub [PAUSE]  and then there was just the general sort of feeling of  [PAUSE]  don\rquote t know [PAUSE]   kind of an anxiety everywhere.  There was somethi
ng hanging over your head and it was always there.  Didn\rquote t matter if you go for a pint, people would be talking about it, or they wouldn\rquote t be talking about it but there\rquote 
d be like an oppressive silence, eh.  The whole mood changed [PAUSE],  mind you, it\rquote s better now.  But it wasn\rquote t a very nice feeling to be, you know, you usually\'85
 Well how come they picked here, what reasons have they got for using this [EMPHASIS]        site as apposed to K airfield or anywhere else like that [PAUSE]    and secondly, where\rquote 
s all the water. I mean, what are they doing [PAUSE] I hope the drains [PAUSE].   There\rquote s the disinfectant as well, it\rquote s not just the actual effluent off of the dead cows and sheep, it\rquote s the disinfectant [PAUSE],   because that
\rquote s going to get into everything and it\rquote s going to have an affect on everything.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid13505170 R and K are thanked for their time
\par 
\par }}