{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs18 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid2043955704\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0
\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid76176438}{\list\listtemplateid-1470188110\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0
\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360\lin360 }{\listname ;}\listid82604209}{\list\listtemplateid1697044854\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0
\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid533541498}{\list\listtemplateid134807567\listsimple{\listlevel
\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360\lin360 }{\listname ;}\listid662970910}{\list\listtemplateid128612234\listsimple{\listlevel
\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid876238803}{\list\listtemplateid-1842603388\listsimple
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat2\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1528762146}{\list\listtemplateid2061525718
\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2138064027}}{\*\listoverridetable
{\listoverride\listid662970910\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid82604209\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid533541498\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid76176438\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid2138064027
\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid876238803\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid1528762146\listoverridecount0\ls7}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1983631\rsid3608127\rsid4554742\rsid9006141\rsid12143426\rsid13379826\rsid14043541\rsid14831509}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy11\hr14\min53}{\printim\yr2003\mo7\dy8\hr8\min38}{\version5}{\edmins12}{\nofpages31}{\nofwords12240}{\nofchars69773}{\*\company  }
{\nofcharsws81850}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot4554742 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid1983631 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1983631 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1983631 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1983631 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid4554742 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid3608127 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid4554742 
\par Diary ID:       PM26}{\insrsid4554742 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid4554742 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid13379826 31}}}{\cs17\insrsid4554742 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid4554742 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid4554742 
\par Information about diarist
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Date of birth: 1971
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 4}{\cs18\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs18\super\insrsid4554742 \chftn }{\insrsid4554742  }{
\b\insrsid4554742 Group 1 }{\insrsid4554742 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid4554742 Group 2 }{\insrsid4554742 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid4554742 Group 3 }{\insrsid4554742 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid4554742 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid4554742 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid4554742 Group 5 }{\insrsid4554742 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid4554742 Group 6 }{\insrsid4554742 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid4554742 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\fs24\insrsid4554742 Geographic region: North Cumbria}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par Week beginning 25}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  February
\par 
\par }\trowd \irow0\irowband0\ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl 
\cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
Had a very busy week at work. Friday was chaotic. Have had a good repertoire with all the customers this week which relaxes me.
\par Lost temper with one work mate, but that is par for the course in a busy week.
\par \cell }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \trowd \irow0\irowband0
\ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil 
\cellx8550\row }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 Being so tired has meant that I haven\rquote 
t really felt like leaving the house. Had a bottle of wine on Tuesday and then went round to a friends for a meal on Friday night. Slept most of Sunday, so have not really got far at all this week.\cell }\pard 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \trowd \irow1\irowband1\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 
\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\row }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par I have spent the last 12 months looking forward to work opening again. Having been closed for almost a year due to Foot and Mouth, you begin to wonder if business will ever start again.
\par One week after we\rquote ve opened and I\rquote m absolutely shattered. We have been so busy.
\par It\rquote s been a really busy week, and I\rquote m so glad that we went to Irene\rquote s on Friday night. It was good to have a night out with friends.
\par 
\par I slept most of Sunday, having gone to bed at 9:30 on Saturday night. That has never been heard off before! Rest of the week I didn\rquote t go anywhere apart from Friday.
\par 
\par C called into work to see me on Friday. We had a good long chat for about an hour. I felt rather sorry for her because we seemed to be unde
r pressure to finish so that I could continue with work. Other staff were rather ignorant about the whole interview and just barged into my office unannounced. Like they couldn\rquote t wait for 60 minutes!
\par  
\par Next week should be quieter at work, thought hopefully I\rquote ll get out of the house for a couple of nights.
\par 
\par Week beginning 4}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par 
\par Had a very busy week at work this week, so social life has been out of the window. Got to Friday and I was absolutely shattered. Did manage to get to Giani\rquote s for a meal on Friday night, however.
\par 
\par Went to see }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s parent this weekend and had a good couple of days away. Very refreshing. 
\par 
\par Mam and Dad told me they are going to see some cattle in the south this week. 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 11}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par Really emotional week has just ended.
\par 
\par We got 86 head of stock at my parents farm on Monday. Went home on Tuesday to see them and I wasn\rquote t really sure whether to smile or cry. Dad said that he had felt the same when they came of the wagon. Went home again 
on Wednesday to sort out the cattle paperwork. Strange, you soon get into the old routine.
\par 
\par Thursday was an implement sale at work which was very hectic. Went home and fell asleep on settee.
\par 
\par On Saturday night we are going to a 30}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  Party in town which I am really looking forward too. It\rquote s quite a while since we had a night in the town. 
\par 
\par Weather has also changed and it feels more like spring every day. Don\rquote t quite know what it is but it makes you  more energetic and want to do more. Guess it won\rquote t be long until the rain comes again.
\par 
\par I did try to watch the Rural Lives program on TV on Tuesday. After about 2-3 minutes, I felt quite sick and turned the TV off. Don\rquote t know what it was, but I felt really uncomfortable watching news reels from 12 months ago. Don\rquote 
t intend to try and watch that program in future. Can\rquote t understand why anyone would want to.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 18}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par Well this has been a week of ups and downs.
\par 
\par Went to pay for our holiday last Saturday. I\rquote m really looking forward to it now. Especially, considering that we never got further than Oasis, Penrith, last year. It just wasn\rquote t worth the risk of going any further. I\rquote 
m also excited because I\rquote ve never been on a \lquote sun\rquote  holiday before, so it\rquote s something new for me.
\par 
\par Some more stock arrived at Mam and Dads over the weekend, so there was more paperwork to check and movements to notify. Things have soon got back to \lquote normal\rquote  back there.
\par 
\par We found out that some staff have been made redundant, so that has really shook everyone at work. We did have two large sales however, and everyone really worked well together. When Friday night came, I was tired but pleased.
\par 
\par Saturday night I went round to Craigs and shared a couple of bottles of wine. Was a bit lonely with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  being away in Manchester, however she came back Sunday after having a really good time.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 25}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par A short week this week. Hooray. Found out on Tuesday that I need to wear glasses. Have got astigmatism in both eyes. As Dad says, if that\rquote s the only thing that I all, then things are good.
\par 
\par C came to see me sat work on Thursday, which was a welcome break for 15 minutes.
\par 
\par This weekend we\rquote re going to Carlisle races. Don\rquote t really know why, I always end up losing money! I\rquote m also going into town with J}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 and M, which I\rquote m really looking forward to. It
\rquote s the first time that we\rquote ve got J}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 out into Carlisle since his wife died.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s working Friday and Saturday, so Sunday and Monday we\rquote re doing nothing. Those two days are for us. We deserve them.
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 1}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par Very bad stomach upset am. I am writing this on Tuesday morning while the problem is persisting.  
\par 
\par I think the problem is because I had a stressful day yesterday.  We have a window cleaner who is not very bright and 
has lived in the village all his life.  He sometimes comes to cut back the Virginia Creeper on my house and clean out the gutters.  Some weeks ago he asked if I would be wanting it done this year and I said yes.  He said he would come when the weather was
 better and that was yesterday.  He is very unintelligent and says things like \lquote  I can\rquote t reach to the other side of the window\rquote 
 when he has his ladder on one side and he needs telling to move the ladder to the other side.  When I was sweeping he said he wan
ted the hand brush to brush the windowsills and I told him 3 times I was using it (as he could see) and finally I shouted at him \'93I \'85AM\'85USING\'85IT\'94  Slowly as indicated by the dots!
\par 
\par By lunchtime I was beside myself and went to the Post Office to get the cash for him and told them there that he must have got worse since he last cut the creeper.  They said he hadn\rquote 
t, he is always that thick.  This makes me think I have lost patience with people.  Usually I am patient.  I really dislike speaking to thick people
 nowadays and told Peter some weeks ago that I would not take a job with thick people again.  This is quite unlike me.  I am sure it is because of working for MAFF when the one thought I had in my mind was \'93You are thick\'94
 every time they changed the rules or made any new ones.  They were so spastic in their approach to organisation.  
\par 
\par One example is that the information required for one form could be obtained by referring to the information contained in two others.  Another example was a Farm Assessment fo
rm which had 3 columns and a Building Assessment form which also had three columns.  Two of the three columns on each form contained identical information and the simplest way to gather it would have been to add a fourth column to the original form rather
 than to re-issue it with one column headed differently.  
\par 
\par The temporary Senior Animal Health Officer I worked under was thick (I thought).  Peter said he wasn\rquote t really, just puddled with drink.  Either way I could not stand it.
\par 
\par Anyway, I hear my aunt moving about so will go and help her dress.  Enough for now, just thought I\rquote d tell you what I think is causing the stomach upsets.
\par 
\par 
\par Thursday
\par 
\par Yesterday was dire.  Lovely day and got on well in garden but needed more moss killer for the lawn also various othe
r things for garden.  While there looked at cheap plant racks encased in plastic covers suitable for seed growing etc.  There was a 10% discount advertised on TV last night and I asked the nice young woman who helped me load some compost onto my trolley w
hen the \lquote sale\rquote 
 began.  She was young, pretty and we had had a jolly chat on the way to the compost stack about men being useful re lifting heavy things.  She, like me, hates political correctness and women are equal theories.  We both agreed we couldn\rquote t lif
t things as well as men and she commented \lquote Heavy work spoils my nails\rquote  (which were very long).  I said I\rquote d need a man to lift it into the car and she said \lquote Ask at the desk, there\rquote s a selection \endash 
 brunette, blonde, or redhead. You can have your pick\'94.  Or words to that effect!  I really  liked her sense of humour and asked her when the sale began.  She said at 7 that night and I said I couldn\rquote 
t get there as I lived in Thursby and had to be in Newton Arlosh for 7.30 (re the first meeting of Women\rquote s Register).  She said \'93Newton Arlosh?\'94 What are you going there for it\rquote 
s a dead hole (or something like that) and that she lived at Kirkbride.  So I said a lifelong friend had moved there last year and was starting this Women\rquote s Register thing.   And also that I had ha
d a farm to see to (actually only 3 pigs) when a Field Officer last year.  She then said her husband farmed at Kirkbride and that they had lost 300 dairy cattle at the beginning of April because the infected stock next door had taken 3 weeks to be removed
.
\par 
\par We talked of all the \lquote mistakes\rquote  MAFF made and I nearly s
tarted to cry when telling about the farm whose problems and the way Mark Jackson was talking about it gave me shingles.  She was very nice, she seemed to have a greater resilience towards what happened than I do.  I think that is because she was young.  
But she knows MAFF \lquote is no better now\rquote  she actually said it because her husband had to go in about something and was shunted from department to department.  We agreed you have to be thick to work for MAFF and also that it\rquote 
s bureaucracy gone mad.  She had had a nice field officer but knew of several who acted like Hitler.  
\par 
\par When I got home I read in the paper that Nick Brown had\rquote  taken evasion to a new art form\rquote  at the Brussels enquiry.  The bit I dislike most is that the government did not tell farmers there
 would be compensation for reduced value if there had been vaccination.  The other problem is that it should have been \lquote vaccination to live\rquote  not \lquote vaccination to slaughter\rquote 
.  The whole text of the Brussels enquiry was not published and I hope that there is some movement on changing the law re \lquote vaccination to slaughter\rquote , this law is just paper and there is no need for it to affect prices/exports etc.
\par 
\par Went to first meeting of Women\rquote s Register.  Some interesting people there, but one or two seemed to be feminist types and heavily involved in \lquote professional caring and being supportive\rquote   Yuk!
\par 
\par Sunday
\par 
\par Yesterday I talked to farmer\rquote s wife I don\rquote t particularly like.  But realise she has a lot to bear.  I don\rquote t need other people\rquote s problems right now, I\rquote ve plenty of my own.  Actually she was not talking about FMD, it
\rquote s just that she was snappy generally.
\par 
\par My sister rang and I told her about the Queen Mother.  She hadn\rquote t heard as they last listened to the news on radio at 5 on Saturday.   She was sad, like me, but we bot
h realise it was probably a release. Even though the Queen Mother does not remind me of FMD, I want to mention her as she was a lovely lady and really cared about people in this country.  I don\rquote 
t mind her spending fortunes and drinking gin, I prefer that someone like her should have a nice lifestyle rather than naff footballers and pop stars.  I liked her style and her set of values which is worthy of the name unlike today\rquote 
s suburban ones.
\par 
\par  My aunt (aged 92) shook hands with the Queen Mother on the ending of the Land Army in 1951.  She represented Cumbria and has a framed photo of the occasion which she keeps in her bedroom, apart from on the Queen Mother\rquote 
s birthday.  I said we should have it downstairs at least until the funeral.  My aunt likes to talk abo
ut the old days.  She is very sanguine about death and has a great belief in the life hereafter.  My worry is that she may give up now the Queen Mother is gone as she has often remarked the Queen Mother is older than her and still keeps going and I think 
it keeps her going.  However the Queen Mother was 9 years older, so she may think about that anyway.  My sister says we must just take it as it comes.
\par 
\par Got the Sunday paper (we don\rquote t usually have one).  Apart from the Queen Mother it said the EU was not goi
ng to pay the full (60% is what they should pay) amount to the UK government for the cost of FMD.  GOOD!!!!!!!!!  Serves the bastards right for making such a hash of it.  
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 8th April
\par }\trowd \irow0\irowband0\ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl 
\cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1623\clshdrawnil \cellx1623\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx3355\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl 
\clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1731\clshdrawnil \cellx5086\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx6818\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl 
\clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard\plain 
\s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0 \b\f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\insrsid4554742 \cell }\pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \trowd \irow0\irowband0
\ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1623\clshdrawnil 
\cellx1623\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx3355\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl 
\cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1731\clshdrawnil \cellx5086\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx6818\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl 
\clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth1732\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\row }\trowd \irow1\irowband1\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt
\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \cell }\pard 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 \trowd \irow1\irowband1\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 
\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\row }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
I had a lovely week. Weather was good and I
 got on well in the garden.  Changed my morning for work as I went away on Thursday.  My boss was in a lot of pain, but she is very brave.  We had a lot of laughter and jokes.  She seems to think I am feeling better than I was and puts it down to the sun 
and being able to get into the garden.  She gave me another tomato plant as one of the ones she gave me before has died.
\par 
\par Left for Whaley Bridge at 10 and arrived at 2.  My aunt\rquote s half-sister, who is my age, came to look after her \endash  due to arrive at 3 so I left after my aunt was up.  Don\rquote t want to write about how I dislike my aunt\rquote 
s blood relatives- they are so selfish and greedy and always self-pitying.
\par 
\par I had a lovely time with my aunt in Whaley Bridge.  She was Austrian but is very proud to be British.  H
er sister came over after the war too.  She is also lovely as are all my cousins, despite some health and domestic problems.  They are so kind and affectionate, I feel as if I\rquote m at home when I\rquote 
m with them and all my worries fade.  Only slight problem was r
e the Queen Mother.  They all felt very kindly towards Princess Diana and therefore are rather anti-royalist though they like the principle of a monarchy.  The other bit of the problem is that the telly was Queen Mother\rquote 
s wartime role and the blitz.  Well Auntie E}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 (my Auntie M\rquote 
s sister) was bombed out three times by the British because she was living in Berlin during the war.  Her hearing was damaged and she has had tinnit}{\fs24\insrsid12143426 u}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
s ever since.  It is important to remember there were wrongs on both sides.  Also their father hated Hitler and that made for problems for them all.
\par 
\par Anyway I had a lovely time, all my cousins came round.  One did my hair beautifully.  On the last night we stayed up talking until half past midnight and I had two glasses of wine
 and felt no ill effects.  They are all going to come and stay when our cousin from New Zealand comes in July.  I am really looking forward to that.
\par 
\par A friend came to collect their computer that I have been storing for nearly two years and that was nice.  
It was nice to see them and also nice to be rid of the computer.  They are very involved with the farming community and his sister-in-law lost a lot of money due to FMD as she does B and B.  I was at school with her and never realised she was B\rquote 
s sister-in-law until a family christening they had 6 years ago!  Anyway I have not seen her since, but C}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 says she\rquote d really love me to go and see them (at Penton)  and C}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{
\fs24\insrsid4554742 is going to fix it.  That is also nice to think about.  I feel I need the boost of feeling people want to see me.  I felt so bad about working for MAFF.
\par 
\par Peter came round almost as soon as I got back and was really depressing because the job he is supposed to start for Business Link still has not got off the ground.  I think he ought to ri
ng them and chivvy them up but he will never do that.  So I refused to go on listening to his tale of woe and just chatted about being away etc.  He was obviously not pleased but I don\rquote 
t want to be dragged down the minute I have had a nice time away.
\par 
\par I am
 very pleased the Queen Mother is getting a good send-off.  I think the media is dreadful the way they keep on about it being a surprise how many are viewing the lying in state.  I think there is a section of the population which is totally out of touch w
ith grass roots society and the media is part of it.  Also the public sector - SPECIALLY MAFF!!!!!!!!!!
\par 
\par That\rquote s about it.  Sorry it\rquote s a bit late, but I\rquote ve been watching the funeral.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 15th April
\par This week has been really busy at work. Unfortunately we still don\rquote t have a full complement of staff and so we have been spending quite long hours in the office. Getting home and trying to study has been difficult, and has resulted in neither }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  or I having any social life. Thank goodness all weeks aren\rquote t the same.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 \page }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week beginning Monday 22}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par Well work has been really busy again this week, which is good because it keeps us all active. I was working last Saturday and today, so the overtime helps also.
\par 
\par Tuesday night I played football for the first time since I twisted my knee. Was so unfit after six months of the field that I could hardly get out of bed the next morning. Muscles were aching that I didn\rquote t even know where there.
\par 
\par Again, we haven\rquote t really been far out of work. I\rquote m studying for my exams now so that keeps me busy most nights.
\par 
\par Big decision this week was to discuss }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  in all of this. So far I\rquote ve tried to keep her out of my diary, but her illness is now starting to have a really big impact on my life.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has ME, and she has had this for about seven years now. For the past five years, she hasn\rquote 
t been bothered with it so much, but during March and April of this year she has really had it bad. The frustration is immense. After a hard day at work, I\rquote m coming home to see someone who can hardly move of the seat at night. We haven\rquote 
t been out socially into town for about 6 weeks, which is a real shame because some of our best nights are in Giannis restaurant. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  blames Foot & Mouth for the resurgence in her ME. As a journalis
t, she was covering every aspect of it for the previous 12 months, working very long days. In December it all came to a stop. 2 months later ME struck. 
\par 
\par It\rquote s very difficult, but we\rquote ll get by.
\par 
\par Week beginning 29}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par Well it seems to be the same entry e
very weeks this past month. Work has been really busy, and so that ties me up from 8am until 7pm most days. An end is in sight however, we have our last really busy day next Friday, and after that things should quieten down significantly. 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has had 
another poor week. The doctors cannot prescribe any medication for her illness. They just tell her to rest as much as she can. That is very frustrating. You expect doctors to make you feel better at the very least, but he says that he can do nothing. He h
as signed her of for two weeks. Emotionally, this makes our household have enormous peaks and troughs. Work is my get out, it allows me to switch  of from home. Callous sounding I know, but I am struggling at the moment.
\par 
\par On a high note, Liz came around last night, and so I had to cook for the three of us, which I did enjoy. Made a new main course of chicken, wine, garlic sauce and pan boiled potatoes. Might be blowing my own top, but it was beautiful.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s decided to go back to her Mam and Dads this week. I\rquote 
ll then go and collect her on Friday night. I can understand her reasoning. She must get bored spending day after day on her own in the house.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 6}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par It\rquote s funny, but I have realised this week this that when I can\rquote t go out because of work, it does not bother me, however when I can\rquote t go out because }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  isn\rquote 
t feeling so well, it frustrates me intensely. I\rquote ve begun to ask myself whether it is me? Am I quite self centred. I never thought so, but my instincts tell me otherwise. Oh dear.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has been at her parents this week, which has given me a little more time to study for my exams in two weeks. We\rquote 
re on the phone nearly every night which is good. She appears to be having up and down days all week. Hopefully, the ups will begin to outnumber the downs very soon.
\par My one worry is that I am being dragged down with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . I try my hardest not to, but eventually it catches up with you.
\par 
\par We\rquote re going on holiday in a couple of weeks which is great. We\rquote 
re both really looking forward to that. A week in the sun. Great.  Tuesday I was down in Bristol which was a bit if a treck down the motorway. Managed to get back before 9pm though, which was very good.
\par 
\par Am going to collect }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  tonight, and hopefully we will go to the southern district young farmers field day on Saturday. If not we\rquote ll be spending the day at home, hopefully in the garden in the sun.

\par 
\par Week beginning 13}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par At last, we have managed to get through our sales schedule at work. It\rquote s been chaos, but we\rquote 
ve come through it in the end. To think, this time last year we were closed, on 50% salary and in the middle of foot & mouth. How times have changed. This May has been frenetic.
\par June & July should be quite quiet, but hopefully it should all start again in August.
\par 
\par Things have been quite quiet at home. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s been feeling a lot better. Every day gets a little bit better, which bodes well for the next few weeks. She\rquote 
s been signed of work for another 2 weeks, so all in, she\rquote ll be of work for another four weeks, as we go on holiday soon. Can\rquote t wait. One week in Portugal, and then we\rquote re heading to Manchester for a few days.
\par 
\par It\rquote s a year this week since Grandma died, so it\rquote s been quite a tough week. I was on the phone to Mam last night and she seems quite \lquote up\rquote  about things. We\rquote re going to church on Sunday, so I think we\rquote 
ll have lunch away for a change.
\par 
\par Next week I have my company secretarial exams in Newcastle. I\rquote m quite worried about them. I shouldn\rquote t be, as I have revised quite a lot. How they\rquote ll go, we\rquote ll see.
\par 
\par  
\par Week beginning 20}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par Exams, Exams, Exams. I do not like exams.
\par I went to Newcastle on Wednesday to sit my secretarial exams. I don\rquote t know why I was so wound up about them because I feel that I did quite well in them. Won\rquote t know how well/bad until about 9 weeks time. Fingers crossed.
\par I stayed in Newcastle on Wednesday night and had quite a good night in the town. Good food and a couple of drinks before the Thursday exam.
\par 
\par Last Saturday }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I went to Giannis for a meal. It was our first real night out for 7 weeks. We had a really good night out. Didn\rquote t stay out late, but enjoyed it none the less.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to a barbecue. Two weeks in a row we\rquote ve gone out, so things are getting back to normal.
\par 
\par 7 Days until we go to Portugal. Went into Carlisle today and spent a small fortune on clothes. I never normally spend much money on clothes, but when you have a woman telling you \lquote how good it looks\rquote , you soon end up spending a small fortune.

\par 
\par Went home to my parents on Sunday. The stock which they purchased to replace the lost stock is all doing very well, so everybody is really pleased. They haven\rquote 
t purchased as much stock as they had before, and have both decided to take things a little easier. Dad\rquote s helping out on farms around the area, and Mam works at Carlisle clinic. I don\rquote 
t blame them. Neither my brother or myself are interested in taking over the farm, so our parents are just keeping what they want.
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week beginning 27}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par HOLIDAY
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 3}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 rd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  June
\par Holiday
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 10th June
\par We went to Portugal for a week and had a great time. The weather was great, the food was great and the resort was excellent. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  had a really good time as well, and has felt a lot better since
 we came home. 
\par 
\par We then went to Manchester for a few days during the second week. We have a couple of friends who live down there and we met up with them and really enjoyed ourselves. The England/Brazil match was on the large screen in Exchange square, so
 we joined the thousands of other people and watched the match in the rain.
\par 
\par I started back at work on Monday, and it was a real shock to the system. It took three days for me to get caught up with my paperwork. After my first day back I was shattered, so I haven\rquote t been out this week at all.
\par June and July are our quietest months, and so we only really have sales two days of the week. 
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to see The Woman in Black at Keswick theatre by the lane. We\rquote re going down with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [couple]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . I think we\rquote re intending to go for a meal prior to the play, but I\rquote 
m not sure. Tomorrow will be a real rest day. I feel absolutely wrecked after this week, so I need to get caught up on my sleep.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 17th June
\par A bit of a strange week this week.
\par 
\par Went to Keswick theatre on Saturday, and really enjoyed the performance. It was excellent. Sunday I did very little.
\par 
\par Monday, and }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  wasn\rquote t feeling very well at all. Tuesday was the same.
\par It was really frustrating. For three weeks, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 has been feeling a lot better, and then  suddenly this week, she seems to be back at square one. On Tuesday the doctor signed her of work for another 2 weeks. 
\par After getting over the initial shock, we happened to be speaking to one of the \lquote Subs\rquote 
 from the Cumberland news. She told us that she was preparing a feature for a food tolerance specialist. Within about 10 minutes we had booked an appointment.
\par 
\par We went today, and after a substantial test we discovered that }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has a severe reaction to yeast and sugar. We have a recommendation of how to alter out diets to accommodate this, and we\rquote 
re going to give it a try for 4 weeks. Whilst it might not be the a cure, if it gives any improvement to the way }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s been for the last few days, then it\rquote ll be worth it. We\rquote 
ll see in a few weeks. No coffee, no alcohol, no biscuits, no crisps. I give ,myself until this Wednesday!!!
\par 
\par We also got word this week that the Cumbria Story feature had been nominated for a national prize in London. Unfortunately we couldn\rquote t go to London as }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  was still off work but we\rquote 
re still really proud, as }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has a lot of work in that feature.
\par 
\par The rest of the week we have been preparing for a refurbishment of the office at work, so this has kept us all quite busy.
\par 
\par Last night we had an old work mate round for a meal. It turned into a really good night. 3:30 this morning we got to bed, and this morning we felt really tired. It was worth it though.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 24}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742   June
\par The first week of our diet has ended, and my only side effect has been a bad head for a few days. I\rquote ve been told that this is to do with us stopping drinking coffee and tea. If this is what happens to you when you don\rquote 
t drink it, what happens when you do drink it?
\par 
\par Took Friday off work and went to IKEA at Gateshead with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
. Had a real laugh in that place. We went in looking for a bed side cabinet, and came out with a car load of stuff, and no bedside cabinet. Once you\rquote re through the door, you go mad. At least, we did.
\par 
\par People have started taking holidays at work, which means that there is less of us in the office to do the work. Fortunately we\rquote ve quietened down now, so there really isn\rquote t a lot to do. Tonight we\rquote 
re going to the cinema to see Minority Report. Looking forward to it as we haven\rquote t been to the cinema for quite a while.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 1st July
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 1}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  July
\par 
\par Not a large entry this week, as nothing has happened. Typical July.
\par 
\par Well, the second week of our diet. Had a bad head for three days last week, seemingly that is the withdrawal from caffeine.  Unsettled me for two days at work though. Feel great now however.
\par 
\par Only two sales in Borderway this week, so the place has been very very quiet.
\par 
\par Going to see my parents and grandparents this weekend. Haven\rquote t seen them for quite a while. Very unusual really, as they only live five minutes, by car, away from my house.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re having another night in. much more of this and I\rquote ll forget how to go
\par 
\par 
\par 8th July
\par 
\par Another week of the diet, and whilst I should be feeling a lot better, I am not reall feeling that good. I think it\rquote s with coming of the caffeine. Whilst I am going down hill, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 is feeling a lot better, and that  is the whole point of this diet. I won\rquote t complain.
\par 
\par We\rquote re still trying to adjust to the new systems at work. DEFRA like to keep a tight grip on procedures. It\rquote s just s shame that the procedures are a waste of time. 
\par 
\par This weekend I\rquote m planning on going out into town with G}{\fs24\insrsid12143426  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 and C. The diet can go on the shelf for 1 night, I\rquote m going on the drink with the boys. It\rquote s quite a while since I\rquote 
ve been into town, so I\rquote m quite looking forward to it.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par Week beginning 15th July
\par Well we\rquote ve now completed the third week of our diet, and while I\rquote m feeling great, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 has hit a bad run of days this week. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday she was really ill again. On Thursday she went down to her parents for a couple of day and visited the food nutritionist again. It appears that sh
e also has a reaction to dairy products. Oh dear !. This didn\rquote 
t show up on the original test, because at that time she was using goats milk if she needed to use milk, however now that she is eating a lot more porridge, she has been using cows milk to make it. 
\par I\rquote m not giving up dairy products, but I don\rquote t see any need to go back to eating as much sugar and caffeine as we did before. Quite frankly, I don\rquote t miss coffee & tea at all.
\par 
\par The rest of the week I have been trying to study. Unfortunately it isn\rquote t going very well at the moment, but I hope that I\rquote ll settle into it within the next couple of weeks.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to the cinema to see Goldmember. The cinema is our only social outlet at the moment, but hopefully as }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  gets better, we\rquote ll get out into town more.
\par 
\par Work has been quiet during July. It\rquote s not unusual for July to be quiet, but we\rquote re gearing up for a really busy August, September & October. We\rquote ll be even busier now, because this week we have just bought the business of Penrith 
Farmers & Kidds. This came as a shock to everyone.
\par We take over the business on September 1}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 , so we\rquote ll also have that to organises during August as well as our own business.}{\i\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par Ordered a copy of the Anderson report yesterday. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  had quite a few interviews with the man when he was in the area, so we\rquote 
re interested to see what he says. Have heard various reviews of its contents, so we\rquote ll see what it\rquote s all about when it arrives. It\rquote s probably a very politically neutral report, in which no one did anything wrong, but they couldn
\rquote t do particular things because of procedures. We\rquote ll see.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 22}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  July
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Mon 5}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  August
\par Well this has been a very good week. We\rquote ve been very busy at work, which is a good sign for the next 3 months. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has been really well for nearly 2 weeks now, which is very promising, and we
\rquote ve managed to get out of the house mid-week for the first time in a few weeks.
\par 
\par Work has been good. The take over of Penrith Farmers and Kidds is progressing. There\rquote s a group of 
farmers trying to put a spanner in the works, but I think they need to wake up and realise what is really going on in the world of agriculture. I think that they will find it very difficult to get 1000 people to invest \'a3
2000 each in an auction mart business. With the four new markets, we\rquote re going to be very busy until the end of October. Oh joy!!!
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has been well for nearly 2 weeks now which is looking very good. We\rquote re not sure whether it\rquote s just taking it easy or the diet. Hopefully, she will have bro
ken the back of this disease. I certainly hope so.
\par 
\par Wednesday night we went to Dalston village hall for a social night. It was a very good night which we both enjoyed, and at which we met a lot of new people. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  then went back to her parents for a few 
days.
\par 
\par On Friday we had to go to Liverpool to collect }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s brother. He\rquote d had a shoulder operation and so wasn\rquote t fit to drive. We got home about 11:30.
\par 
\par Tomorrow we\rquote re going to see the Love, Labour and Loss exhibition at Tullie House. I\rquote m quite excited, as I\rquote ve never been to Tullie house before, so it will be an all new experience.
\par 
\par At home, Mam and Dad are taking delivery of some sheep this weekend. They\rquote ll be the first sheep on the farm for over a year. I\rquote ve never enquired as to what they\rquote 
re thinking at the moment, but they seem excited to be getting some sheep back in the fields. They\rquote ve gone into pedigrees to try and breed some better stock.
\par 
\par Week beginning Mon 12}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  August
\par Another week has gone. All too quickly if you ask me!
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and 
myself went to see Love Labour and Loss at Tullie House on Sunday. It was a really good exhibition, with some very good paintings showing the different depiction of stock through the ages. Had a good luck at the Damien Hurst piece, but couldn\rquote 
t really see what all the fuss was about. Rather dull if you ask me. We then went for a look around Tullie house itself, as I\rquote ve never been there before. Thirty years I\rquote ve lived near Carlisle and I\rquote 
ve never been to Tullie House. Oh the shame!!!!. We did think about going to Lowther horse trials, but the weather was against us from early in the morning.
\par 
\par Sunday and Monday night I studied, and on Friday it was 9:30pm when I got home from work, so that ruined any plans which I had for going into town.
\par 
\par On Tuesday, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  was not well at all. Fortunately she already had a doctor\rquote 
s appointment booked for Tuesday, and so he has signed her of for another 3 weeks, which is a real downer. Since Tuesday she has been getting better, and we\rquote ve decided that we\rquote re going into town for a meal tonight as we\rquote 
re sick of eating restricted food, and drinking restricted drink.
\par 
\par Mam and Dad took delivery of their sheep on Sunday. They were both really excited as they arrived, but after a few hours it was \lquote back to normal\rquote . They are now operating as a full farming unit as they did before.
\par 
\par At work, we\rquote re pretty much non stop at present. We have a sale every day, at one premise or another,  through until the second week of November. We\rquote ll certainly be kept going. Bad thing about it is though that it doesn\rquote 
t leave you much time for a social life or to study. I\rquote ll have to see how I can work my four nights of study around my work.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Mon 19}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  August
\par Well having been \lquote on the wagon\rquote  for nearly 4 weeks, I\rquote ve finally fell off\rquote , and believe me it\rquote s really difficult to get back onto a moving target! I stayed of the drink so as to support }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{
\fs24\insrsid4554742 , but my time has come, and on Saturday I went into town and came home hammered. Pure and simple, hammered. My only consolation was that my friends were in a worse state than I was.
\par 
\par Sunday was the day that was never there. I went back to my parents with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 and we spent most of the afternoon talking to them. Now that they have got sheep back they are very happy, but my dad is trying to purchase a ram, a
nd trying to find the right one for him is like trying to pick a winning leek. It will take him all day, and he still won\rquote t be happy with what he\rquote s picked.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s been well for a whole week which is promising, so fingers crossed, perhaps we\rquote re finally b
eginning to get somewhere. They are beginning to think now that she has a reaction to dairy products which is rather unusual as she has lived on a dairy farm for 25 years.
\par The thing is that at this stage, she is prepared to try anything to get back to work again.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Mon 26th}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  August
\par Well we went out again on Saturday. The second time in as many weeks. I was rather surprised when }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  suggested that we went to Giannis, but I\rquote 
m glad that we did because we had a really good meal, and a really good night afterwards when we met our friends in town.
\par Sunday I was absolutely shattered so I just layed in the sun lounger and read the newspapers.
\par 
\par I\rquote ve tried to catch up with my study this week which has been rather difficult. I\rquote m trying to stick to my organised night which are Sunday, Monday, Wednesday and Thursday, although I can see that some weeks I won\rquote 
t be able to manage my set nights.
\par 
\par On Tuesday }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s boss called round. He was really concerned to hear that she had been 
signed off for three weeks this time. We managed to console him however by informing him that she was only signed off because the doctors had himself taken three weeks holiday and didn\rquote t want anyone else to see her.  
\par 
\par This weekend we\rquote re planning a night in. We went into Carlisle this afternoon and had intended to go to the cinema, but after wandering round for a while we decided to come home and \lquote vegitate\rquote  in front of the television.
\par }\pard \qj \li360\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par Week beginning 2}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  September
\par Well the first week of September has come and gone. Where did it go?
\par Things have been really chaotic at work, what with the new marts and the full sales calendar which we currently have. All in all though it\rquote s fun, and it keeps us busy.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has been signed off for a further two weeks, but this time it is \lquote just for safety\rquote . She\rquote 
s been really well for that past three weeks and the Doctor has said that she could probably go back to work a week on Monday. The excitement in the house at the moment is amazing. It\rquote s like we\rquote ve won a fantastic holiday abroad. }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is just so high. Unfortunately I don\rquote t feel that I can get as excited because I feel so tired with work at the moment, and trying to fit in my study is very difficult, but I\rquote 
m trying to give that a little priority over my work.
\par 
\par Football on Tuesday was a real laugh. When I got up in Wednesday I could hardly move though. I\rquote ve had an achey back ever since!
\par 
\par Today the Cumberland news had a front page article about this study. It made interesting reading, and every one was really impressed that I was actually taking part 
\par 
\par in it. How was I coping with the stress of it all was the main question, and when I actually sat down to think about it over dinner, I realised that I have honestly never sat down to think about the whole \lquote aura\rquote  around foot and 
mouth. I just seem to have accepted it and moved on. I have never worn my feelings on my shoulder, so to speak, but I do not think about the foot and mouth, perhaps, as much as I should.
\par 
\par Tomorrow night we\rquote re going to the Silloth beer festival. It doesn\rquote t quite have the same ring to it as Munich beer festival but I\rquote m sure that it will be an enjoyable night. We\rquote 
ve got a minibus booked from the Turf at 6:30, and we\rquote re both really looking forward to it.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 9th September
\par Well if being at work from 8 until 8 six days a week is fun, then I\rquote m having the time of my life. Unfortunately, when it comes to the weekend, I\rquote m so tired that I can\rquote t be hassled to go out. The up side is that it\rquote 
s only like this for the month of September, so come October I\rquote ll really appreciate going out. Saying that, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I haven\rquote t been that far in the last five months, so nothing\rquote 
s new if you think about it!
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s still keeping well. Everyone has fingers crossed that this will stay, so that hopefully she\rquote ll be back at work next week. 
\par 
\par Elsewhere, Mam and Dad have just came back from Rhodes, having had a wonderful week in the sun. Makes me want to go away again. Hmmmm.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 16th September
\par Another chaotic week. Enough said about work!
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has
 been signed of for another week, but she has been told that she can go back to work next Thursday. At last, we have a bright light at the end of the tunnel. To celebrate we went along to a leaving party at Weatherspoons on Thursday. Both of us came home 
a bit worse for the night. Unfortunately I had work on Friday. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  took a couple of days to recover, but it\rquote s the first time that she has really been out into town for a few months.
\par 
\par Last night we booked out holiday for next year. We\rquote ve used all of our a
ir miles and booked a holiday to Orlando in March. It seems like ages away, but it will soon come around. We both needed a holiday to look forward too, so now we have it. Eleven nights in the sun.
\par 
\par Next week is our birthdays, so we\rquote ve booked a table at Galla Rosso. It\rquote s supposed to be very good, so we\rquote re both excited about it.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning 23rd September
\par Well, amidst all the chaos of work this past few weeks, a bright spot has arrived. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  went back to work on Thursday morning. She\rquote s only going 
to do mornings for a few weeks to see how it goes. Her first two days, she has felt great. The nervous anticipation of going back meant that we didn\rquote t get much sleep on Wednesday night, but after the first few hours she was fine.
\par Finger crossed.
\par 
\par Yesterday
 was my birthday, so we went to Galla Rosso last night. It was excellent. We went with a couple of friends and had a really enjoyable night. Today I was working, and so tonight we have got a couple of films to watch; Gosford Park and The Perfect Storm. To
morrow we\rquote re just going to have a day \lquote vedging\rquote .
\par 
\par Mid week there was another F & M scare which was rather unnerving. It appeared that the government wasn\rquote t trying to hide any bad news, so it was thought that it could actually be a case. Work was on edge all
 day. In the end it turned out to be negative, which was a big relief.
\par 
\par On Monday it is 1 year since the last case of F & M. How time flies. It\rquote s amazing how much happens in 1 year. In the office we were talking about how much we would have given to be as 
busy as we currently are at work, 12 months ago. However, here we are now, we got through it, we\rquote re busier than ever, and it actually looks as though we may actually be making money.
\par 
\par 
\par Week beginning Monday 30}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  September
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  worked four days of this week. She\rquote s only working 9:30 until 1:30, but it\rquote s a start. She\rquote 
s been feeling well, but just to be safe, she took Wednesday off. Talk about an anxious week. We weren\rquote t sure how she would feel back in the office, but the company and its staff are all being really supportive to her.
\par 
\par We\rquote ve finally \lquote broken the back\rquote  of our busy season, and this week I have felt absolutely shattered.  Probably more so that I have ever felt before. 
\par 
\par On Tuesday we went to Gianni\rquote s to celebrate }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s birthday, and on Friday we went out for a meal with }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote 
s parents. Both nights we had really good food and an excellent night. We\rquote re both a bit wary though of what }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has eaten. We\rquote re a bit bothered that it may have repercussions for her next
 week.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote ve got some more dvd\rquote s to watch. Monsters Inc and The }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 C}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 ount of Monte Cristo. I may go and get some wine so we can just spend the night on the couch with a drink. }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  can\rquote t eat chocolate, so mints are of}{\fs24\insrsid12143426 f}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  the menu.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 \page }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week beginning 7}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  October
\par I had a days holiday on Monday which was wonderful. I met up with a long time friend for dinner, and spent the best part of three hours talking about nothing much really.
\par 
\par Tuesday I went to football, and nearly ended up with a broken leg. How it didn\rquote t give I do not know.
\par 
\par Wednesday was a really bad day. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  said that she wasn\rquote 
t feeling so well, but that she would go to work anyway. Nothing improved. On Thursday she again went to work but had to leave after an hour. She came home in a heck of a s
tate. We guessed on reflection that the meals the week before would affect her, but we didn\rquote t think that it would be quite so bad. It\rquote s scared us both quite dramatically. After speaking to her nutritionist yesterday, she\rquote 
s altered her diet and that should take effect within 36 hours hopefully. We\rquote ll see.
\par 
\par It\rquote s a shame really because we have friends coming up from Manchester on Saturday, and we were hoping to be going out with them. We\rquote ll have to change our plans for them now, and probably end up cooking ourselves for them. We\rquote 
ve got plenty of wine in the house so a night in might be a good thing.
\par 
\par Unfortunately, I\rquote m having to work on Saturday morning, so I won\rquote t get a chance to sleep in this weekend. I may yet take another day off next week to try and catch 
up on some of my sleep. This past two months have really whacked me. I could sleep on a fence some nights.
\par 
\par Week 31 14}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  October
\par 
\par Well after quite a scare, things have levelled out again. It appears from her food diary that }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  had a couple of yoghurts 
at the beginning of last week, and that just upset the balance of her body completely. However things have settled out and she\rquote s back to work again and feeling well. Excellent.
\par 
\par As for other things, we\rquote ve finally quietened down at work, meaning that we generally finish at 5:oo \lquote ish and we tend to get out for a lunch hour every couple of days. Oh the things you miss but don\rquote t really think about. Tonight we
\rquote re going to a YFC dance at Drigg. It\rquote s }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s old young farmers club and we\rquote re not really looking forward to it, but you never know, it might turn into a good night.
\par 
\par I\rquote ve been trying to study as much as I can, without much success really, but the next 5 weeks will have to be pretty intensive as my exams are at the end of November. Can\rquote t wait until they\rquote r
e over, as then we can concentrate on Christmas parties.
\par 
\par This week, we sold a Ram at one of out marts for \'a3101,000. Imagine the publicity which will be circulated when the press get hold of that. Foot and Mouth compensation will be the only reason it coul
d have possibly made so much. Nothing to do with the superb breeding and bloodlines which it contained. But there we go.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 \page }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week 32  21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  October
\par Well, we went to Drigg young farmers dinner last weekend and had an absolutely brilliant night. It has been such a long time since I have seen many of the members from down there. All any of them wanted to talk about was Foot & Mouth and what I\rquote 
ve been doing since we opened the mart again. It was strange to think that it has been  nearly 2 years since I have seen quite a lot of them. We had a really good night, and when we think back now, we can\rquote t understand why we w
ere so apprehensive about the whole night.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is beginning to increase her hours at work gradually. She is still working at the Bank Street office, but she has her name in the paper again which is a good feeling.
\par 
\par Study is going quite well. We managed to book a hotel in Newcastle for 2 nights, and so we\rquote re both going over and }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is going shopping whilst I sit the exams. Sounds a strange deal to me!.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 33  28}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s friend came up to see us on Friday night. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I cooked a
nd supplied the wine, and we all had a very good night. She left about 10:00 on Saturday morning. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I just went for a wander into Carlisle which was quite relaxing.
\par 
\par This week I\rquote m off work on Tuesday and Wednesday which is ideal, as I\rquote m planning to spend quite a time in the Library studying. It\rquote s the place where I can guarantee to switch off.
\par 
\par I\rquote m also beginning to get caught up on my holidays this next few weeks. I\rquote ve got thirteen days to take off yet, and so I\rquote m trying to get them in before the year end. Unfortunately I\rquote 
m not managing to get to Smithfield show this year, but most of the staff in the office are managing to get away to it. We couldn\rquote t have managed that four weeks ago!
\par 
\par Tomorrow we\rquote re hoping to go to the Anne Frank exhibition at Tullie house, and after that we\rquote re planning on going to the bonfire in Bitts Park.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 34   4}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  November
\par We went to see the Anne Frank Exhibition last weekend and it was very very humbling. There was a film shown within the exhibition and it really brought home how cruel the second world war was. When we left the museum at about six o\rquote 
clock and it was pouring down, and so that put and end to going to the bonfire at Bitts park. We got a Chinese, a bottle of wine and spent the night in front of the television. Mind, we could hear the fireworks until ten o\rquote clock.
\par 
\par Tuesday was my last night at the football, which was a bit disappointing, but I need my nights to study for two weeks time, which isn\rquote t going so well at the moment. I\rquote ve also agreed to take part in a p
lay at the Green Room at the end of January. I am so looking forward to that, as I have missed the stage for nearly a year now.
\par 
\par I managed to get a dinner hour on Thursday which was my first for weeks. Next week I\rquote m off for three days which is wonderful. Wednesday, Thursday and Friday I am going to veg\rquote  (whilst studying at the same time!).
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is going really well at work. She is going to work her first full day this next week which is very exciting. I am confident that she will have no problems, but }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{
\fs24\insrsid4554742  isn\rquote t so sure. We still have quite a big confidence barrier to climb over, but we\rquote ll get there eventually.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 35      11}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  November
\par Well a pretty boring week all in, I took Wednesday, Thursday and Friday off work so that I could study, and I managed to get a lot of work into three days.
\par 
\par Tonight }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I are going to the pictures, though we\rquote re not sure what to see.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has been really well. We think that we have finally nailed it now. Our diet has completely changed, though I still sin on the odd bar of chocolate.
\par Having upped her hours gradually, she\rquote s now thinking about full time hours within the next couple of weeks.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 36   18}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  November
\par How time flies. I have my exams next week which is quite surreal. It does not seem like 6 months since I started this course, but once next Wednesday afternoon comes it will all be over for a month or two.
\par 
\par It\rquote s also been our month end at work which has made things very chaotic. Just what you don\rquote t need the week before exams.
\par 
\par Monday night I went to a play rehearsal so that I could get a feel of what the whole play was going to be like. It is extremely funny, and looks very difficult to learn.
\par 
\par Today we went for a wander into town and had coffee in the town house. Christmas is now only five weeks away, so we were trying to line up a few presents. Didn\rquote t see much that took our fancy however. Perhaps when we\rquote re in Newcastle we
\rquote ll manage to get something sorted.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 37   25}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  November
\par Well that was the week that was. We went to Newcastle on Monday, and I sat my exams on Tuesday and Wednesday. They both went quite well, but as is always the case with these things, you never know until the results come through.
\par On Tuesday }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  went shopping into Newcastle and after a full day on her feet, wandering around the town, she felt great. 
\par 
\par Thursday we did very little, and on Friday we went into Carlisle to watch the new James Bond film which was very good.
\par 
\par Last night we went for a meal to David\rquote s restaurant which was excellent. It was our second anniversary so we thought we would celebrate in style.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re invited to a 40}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  which is rather scary, as we seem to be past the stage of 21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 birthdays now, so we must be getting old. Tomorrow we\rquote ve got a friend coming who\rquote s been in Australia for the past year. Should have plenty to talk about.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 38 \endash  2}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  December
\par Well after the stresses of preparing for exams, I\rquote ve now got to start learning my words for the play which I\rquote 
m in at the end of January. It seems so long before the play actually starts, but with Christmas in between, it will soon come around.
\par 
\par Saturday night I went to H\rquote s fortieth birthday party which was a very good night. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  didn\rquote t go in the end because her friend had just arrived back from Australia and had a few \lquote 
problems\rquote  which needed sorted out. Ended up getting a lift home with }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 [friends]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  as I was incapable of ordering a taxi. Seemingly!!.
\par 
\par Tonight I\rquote m going into town with M. He used to work in our office, but is a good friend who I keep in touch with. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 is going to her Christmas party at the Golden Pheasant. Come tomorrow morning I guess thsat there will be no talking to either of us.
\par 
\par It\rquote s been a strange week really. Once all of the pressure of exams has gone, I can rest a little. Learning play words is not as difficult as revising for an exam, and I find it quite relaxing. Good job, I\rquote 
ve got 5 weeks of learning them to come.
\par 
\par week 39 \endash  9}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  December 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 The Christmas party season has started. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 and I were at the H&H Christmas party at the Crown, Wetheral on Thursday night. It was a really good night, with good food, drink and company. We caught a taxi home around midnight. On Friday night I went to my office party at the Cumbria P
ark. It was also a good night. The food was excellent. I drank and danced all night. It was made all the more special because there were only 10 of us there, and not 75 like the night before.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re staying in as we\rquote re going out again tomorrow night to the Crossings pub. There\rquote s about 18 of us going out for a meal. We\rquote ve known each other since we were kids and haven\rquote t seen each other for months. We
\rquote re both looking forward to it.
\par 
\par My play words are going well. It makes it a lot easier as we\rquote re very quiet at work during December, so I get plenty of time to learn words which is an advantage. 
\par 
\par Generally things are very quiet. Christmas is nearly upon us so I\rquote m going through the usual \'93what should I get\'94 routine. I don\rquote t like going into town though as it\rquote 
s generally chaos once you get to the last few weeks before Christmas. Never mind, it will soon be over.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 
\par \page }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week 40 \endash  16}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  December
\par 
\par Well after last week, this week has been positively boring. Our only night out has been to the cinema to see Lord of the Rings. We then went to Giannis afterwards and had a bite to eat.
\par 
\par Work has almost come to a standstill, but that\rquote s normal for this time of the year. Nothing much will change until the end of February. We close at lunch time on Christmas eve, and that\rquote s us closed until Monday 30}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 
th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  December. Quite a long break for us really.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to Vivaldis for a meal and then we\rquote re heading into town afterwards. Probably Moods. Again! Looking forward to it though. Next week we\rquote re heading to }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote 
s parents for Christmas eve and morning, and then back to my parents on Christmas afternoon. After the year we\rquote ve had, we\rquote re really looking forward to Christmas and especially the  New Year.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 41 \endash 23rd December
\par Christmas week has come and gone. Where did it go too?
\par 
\par This past week has been fantastic. We were working Monday and Tuesday morning. Tuesday afternoon we went down to }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
s parents, and we stayed there until mid afternoon on Christmas day. We then went back to my parents and then ended up back home in Tribune drive. Santa was really good to both of us.
\par 
\par On Boxing day Mam and Dad came to see us, and on Friday we just lazed around the house and didn\rquote t venture very far at all. Last night }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 went back to her parents and Craig came round for a drink with me. Tonight I\rquote m going down to pick }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  up.
\par 
\par Overall, Christmas has been excellent. Haven\rquote t had many parties during the last week, but so what, I had them all the week before. Onto New Year now and our murder mystery at M}{\fs24\insrsid9006141 \rquote }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
s. That we are both really looking forward too.
\par 
\par Soon as New Year passes, I\rquote ll be rehearsing for my play again.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 42 \endash  30}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  December
\par 
\par Well New Year has come and gone, and what a New year it was. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I went to a 60\rquote s murder mystery in Carlisle with 6 friends and we had a v
ery good night. Unfortunately, the day after was torture. I felt like I had been drinking for about three weeks constantly. It will take me about two weeks to fully recover, but going on a detox is a lot easier for }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{
\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I  than for many other people, after all, we\rquote ve been through it all before.
\par 
\par Last night we began rehearsing the play again. We\rquote re on stage three weeks on Monday, and we\rquote re all having problems with our words. Oh dear. We\rquote re rehearsing three nights a week for the next three weeks so all 
in all we only have 9 rehearsals left. Frightening!!!.
\par 
\par Unfortunately we got paid the week before Christmas, and so January is going to turn into a really long month. A whole four weeks to go before we get paid again. This month is going to be torture.
\par 
\par Work will go really quiet now. January, February and March are our quietest months. It\rquote 
s a good time of year to catch up on various bits of paperwork. Unfortunately, when things are so quiet, you begin to feel a little insecure, ever though you know that it will get busy at the beginning of April. Three months is a long time.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 43 \endash 6}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  January 2003
\par 
\par Well January has got into full swing, and so far we haven\rquote t been anywhere. Christmas seems so long ago now and it\rquote s only the second week of the new year.  Mo
st of my week is taken up with play practices and football on a  Tuesday night. My one current night in is Thursday, and even then I\rquote 
m looking at my play words, trying to remember them. Another three weeks and it will all be over. Then we can start looking forward to our holiday.
\par 
\par Work has taken a peculiar turn. Since the turn of the year, I have noticed when I\rquote m ringing people for money that the banks are really putting the pressure on quite a lot of the local farmers. So much so that some of them cannot e
ven make an offer of payment. It\rquote s amazing, but it has taken 18 months since foot & mouth for this to come to the fore. We said this would happen, and so it has. The people who didn\rquote 
t get foot & mouth locally are struggling more so than ever before. What will happen in the next few months we don\rquote t know, but for some people it will be a long winter, and it is really making my job hard, and quite demoralising. It\rquote 
s a good job that I\rquote ve currently got the play to keep me going and my  holiday to look forward to.
\par 
\par Week 44 \endash  13}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  January
\par 
\par Well another quiet week. On Saturday we went out to Michaelangelo\rquote s for a meal with my Mam and Dad. We had a lovely meal, and a good night. Sunday I had another play rehearsal in order to try and get our words learned. 
\par The rest of the week was rehearsals and football. Very much like the week before!
\par 
\par Sunday night I went to the Crown at Wetheral. Work had organised an afternoon and day of appraisal training. It was a very good 36 hours, however it was 3:30 in the morning 
before we got to bed on Monday. The 7:00 alarm soon came around. The rest of the week I have been struggling to catch up with my sleep.
\par 
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to Wallfoot hotel for a meal with the whole family. It\rquote s my Nana\rquote s 80}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  Birthday, so we\rquote re having a family get together. Should be a good night.
\par 
\par Today we just went wandering around town. Had lunch in the Loaf and Ladle, and then we went to Ottakars for a piece of cake.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 45 \endash  20}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  January
\par Next week we begin the run of the play. We\rquote re currently rehearsing four times a week, which is very tiring, and totally ruins your social life. We\rquote 
ve started rehearsing on a Sunday afternoon, which none of us are happy about, but never mind, we need the time to get things right. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I haven\rquote t really been out much as a result, but once it
\rquote s all over we\rquote ll make up for it I\rquote m sure.
\par 
\par Today we went into town for lunch at the Loaf and Ladle. As always it was lovely. Stilton and Apple toastie in there is gorgeous. Tonight we\rquote re just going to stay in, and hopefully have one last look at the play words. We have our dress rehearsal 

\par 
\par tomorrow, so we're hoping that it is an improvement from Friday night which was awful.
\par 
\par Work is really quiet at the minute. Good time for people to take holidays, but no one ever does. Thankfully we get paid next Friday. It has been a really long month (6 weeks). We\rquote re still saving for when we go on holiday. Only six weeks now. Can
\rquote t wait. We\rquote ve booked to go and see Madam Butterfly at the Royal Albert Hall which we are both really excited about. But, most of all, we\rquote re really just looking for some sunshine. February isn\rquote t normally a good month for }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 , so we\rquote re going to get away from it all.
\par 
\par I went to see the Doctor last week about my knee which has been troubling me for some time. Unfortunately, I have been referred to a consultant so we\rquote ll have to wait for that to come through. Fortunately, I\rquote 
m a member of the H&H health scheme so it shouldn\rquote t be so long before I get an appointment.
\par 
\par Week 46 \endash  27}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  January
\par Well it\rquote s Saturday 
afternoon, and I am physically shattered. We have been performing the play for 5 nights now, and it is really going well. People are laughing, shouting, and generally having a good night watching the play, which is why we do it. The down side is that I ha
ven\rquote t been getting a lot of sleep because I come home from each performance as high as a kite, and it takes me the best part of an hour to come back down to earth. End up not getting to bet until about 11:30. I haven\rquote t really seen a lot of }
{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  therefore, apart from tea time, and I\rquote m not the best of moods in the office towards the end of the week. People know what to expect though, and they are all really supportive of me which is good.

\par Tonight is the final performance. Last night we had it 98% right, tonight we\rquote re aiming for 99%. Well we can always hope!
\par 
\par I have got an appointment with a consultant on Thursday. That hasn\rquote t taken long at all. I\rquote m hoping that we can get it sorted before we go on holiday. 
\par 
\par Outside of the play, there hasn\rquote t been anything going on in my social life.
\par 
\par Mam and Dad have started lambing at home which is quite exciting because it\rquote s the first lambs born since they went down with foot & mouth. That\rquote s about the only excitement outside of the play. Hopefully there will be more next week.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 \page }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 Week 47 \endash  3}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 rd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  February
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4554742 Well at last, the play has finished. It doesn\rquote t seem like a week since Saturday night, but that\rquote 
s what happens the week of the play, time has no relevance, and for a week or two afterwards it takes a while to get re-adjusted. This week I must have been a nightmare to live with. I come home and I\rquote m itching for something to do, after all, I
\rquote ve been going out for nearly every night for the last four weeks. I don\rquote t know how }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  puts up with it. All in all however
, the play was excellent, and was received very well by all who watched it. It\rquote s just a shame that it will be so long before I get to do another one. It\rquote 
s funny, but after doing this play, and getting the response, both as a cast and personal, I really feel like quitting work and going to drama school, but it is just such a BIG STEP.
\par 
\par On Thursday I had an appointment with a consultant who examined my knee. He thinks that I have displaced my knee cap, and so he\rquote s sending me for an MRI scan. We\rquote ll see what happens from that.
\par 
\par This weekend }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is going to her parents, and then on Sunday we\rquote re heading down to Leeds to watch the rugby against Whitehaven. I haven\rquote t been to Leeds before, but I don\rquote t think I
\rquote ll get to see much of it as we\rquote re only going to Headingley which is on the edge of town.
\par 
\par Mam and Dad are still lambing sheep at home. I think they\rquote ve had more trouble lambing this year when they only have 120, than when they have 600. It seems to be taking forever, but they\rquote re enjoying it.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 48 \endash  10}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  February
\par The rugby match at Leeds was great. Whitehaven got hammered, but they were playing a super league team after all. We had a good day out and a good journey there and back. We went via Kirkby Lonsdale and Skipton, and it was an absolutely beautiful da
y to travel over.
\par 
\par On Thursday I had my MRI scan. The radiographer says that she couldn\rquote t see anything major happening in my knee, but she thought that the muscle may have torn, and so my knee cap would be moving slightly. She suggested that It would just 
take time to sort itself out. I now have to wait for another appointment with my consultant. Hopefully that shouldn\rquote t take long.
\par 
\par I was planning to start studying this week, but we\rquote re so near the end of our 2000 piece jigsaw that it has become a mission to
 complete. The study will have to wait until next week by which time we will have finished this damn puzzle. It is just so frustrating at times. It has taken us nearly 6 weeks to complete.
\par 
\par Last night }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I went to La Gall for a meal. It was lovely to be out eating in town again. It felt right which is the first time in a long time. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 has had to be so picky about what she ate recently, but on Friday she just wasn\rquote t bothered, and what is more, she felt great today. 
\par 
\par This afternoon we\rquote re going to Carlisle castle, and then we\rquote re going to see Chicago at the cinema. I\rquote ve never been to the castle in my life, so I\rquote m quite looking forward to it.
\par 
\par Week 49 \endash  17}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  February
\par Haven\rquote 
t really done a lot at all this week. We went to Carlisle castle last Saturday which was really interesting. Bit smaller than what I thought, but it still took 2 hours 30 mins to get round it. We then went to Tullie house for lunch, and on to the cinema t
o see Chicago which was great.
\par 
\par We\rquote ve only got 2 weeks until we go on holiday now, and we\rquote re both really excited. The weather has been a bit poor this week, so it makes you want to look forward to the sunshine. Talk about wishing time away!
\par 
\par 
\par We got some mo
re information on the proposed six day rule at work this week, and Trevor has made it clear that if the new government proposals re: 90 mile restrictions are imposed, then we shall be closed in August of this year. Quite dramatic, which is always Trevor
\rquote s way, but lets face it, we don\rquote t have a decent abattoir within 90 miles. Lets hope the industry can talk some sense into the anti farmer government.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote ve got a couple of films to watch. Aliens and Airplane, both are really good, so we\rquote ve got a bottle of wine to go along with them.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 50 \endash  24}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  February
\par Well, another week flies by. They don\rquote t seem to last any longer do they. I\rquote ve just watched Bremner Bird and Fortune on the tv. I taped it last week, and have just got round to watching it. Talk a
bout hilarious comedy. I find it side splitting. It\rquote s all very well being funny, but to be topical and funny at the same time is amazing.
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to the Lemon lounge in Carlisle to celebrate M\rquote s 30}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  birthday. He was actually 30 in January, but he didn\rquote t organise anything, so }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}
{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I took it upon ourselves to get a party organised. Everyone is looking forward to it, and the great part is that M}{\fs24\insrsid9006141  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 hasn\rquote t got a clue how many are going to be there.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has completed her first full hours week since last March. Whilst we\rquote ve been to hell and back during the last 12 months, this is a major breakthrough. She isn\rquote 
t going to work any hours overtime, shifts, or weekends. In fact I can\rquote t see her taking any of that on until 6 months has passed.
\par 
\par Well that\rquote s the last diary for a while. This next week I shan\rquote t be reporting anything,  but I\rquote ll report my second week of holiday when I get back (just to make you jealous!!!!)
\par 
\par 51 - 3}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 rd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March - holiday
\par 52 - 10}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March - holiday
\par 
\par 53 - 17}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par Well we\rquote re back home after two weeks in the sun and it was fantastic. We have had the most amazing time in Florida. We saw about half of what there was to see (tourist wise), so that means we can go back in the future.
\par Orlando itself was very quiet. There were no holiday breaks in USA, so there were very few people around. Unfortunately Magic Kingdom wasn\rquote t so quiet, and it was a really hard day, we were both shattered at the end of the day.
\par We never had to rush around, and we never felt tired, apart from our day at Magic Kingdom. It was great, }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 really enjoyed her time there. With plenty of rest at the water parks, it was a very relaxing holiday. We got back yesterday (Sat), after a 28 hour day. That was the most tiring part of the break.
\par 
\par I\rquote m back at work tomorrow. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  has Monday off, so she can get her sleep back.
\par }{\fs24\cf6\insrsid4554742 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 54 - 24}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par Well I\rquote m shattered today. It\rquote s been a hard week at work, but I suppose that was to be expected. When you come back from holiday, you certainly come back to earth with a bump. Haven\rquote 
t really had much time to talk to anyone at work this week. It\rquote s been the month end, and unfortunately I\rquote ve had my head in a book most of the week. Great eh. 
\par Last night we went to }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 [a]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  party at Aspatria rugby club. It was a good night, but nothing brilliant. For the rest of the weekend we\rquote 
re doing nothing but laying low and going to bed. Tomorrow we\rquote re going through to my }{\fs24\insrsid3608127 M}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 am and }{\fs24\insrsid3608127 D}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 ads.}{\fs24\insrsid3608127  }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
The clocks change tonight, so we loose another hour which is great, even less sleep. Just what we need.
\par This will probably be the quietest week of the year.
\par }{\fs24\cf6\insrsid4554742 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 55 - 31}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  March
\par Another quiet week. Work has been very quiet. Today we went into town for a wander. It\rquote s the first time we\rquote ve been into town since we got back. You realise what a small place Carlisle is, when you\rquote 
ve been away. I always feel down when I come back from a big city. London, Manchester, Newcastle, they ll make Carlisle look backward.
\par Tonight }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I are going to Keswick theatre to see a passionate woman. It\rquote s supposed to be a comedy. I hope it is, but I\rquote ve got this feeling that it will be somewhat of a woman}{
\fs24\insrsid3608127 \rquote }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 s play. We\rquote ll see. Tomorrow we\rquote re visiting Grandparents, which will probably take all afternoon. There\rquote s never a short visit! After that we hope to tidy the garden. It\rquote 
s a real mess, and needs a good sorting. If we don\rquote t get  it done this weekend, then it will take weeks to get done.
\par 
\par 56 - 7}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par Holiday blues have really kicked in now. I get depressed every time I think of our holiday. Give it another few days and it\rquote ll blow over. When you\rquote ve had a good time,  you don\rquote t want to give it up. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{
\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s got the blues as well. We\rquote ve both come to the conclusion that we\rquote re big city people, who like things to be happening all the time. Unfortunately in Carlisle, that doesn\rquote t happen.
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s back a work full time which is great.  She\rquote s doing full hours and starting at 8:30 which is ideal. She\rquote s not feeling any side effects of long hours which is great.
\par 
\par I seem to spend every night of the week revising at the moment.  My exams are in June, so I have to get my head down. I\rquote m finding it quite tough at the minute, but I\rquote m sticking with it.
\par 
\par Surprise of the year was yesterday when I had my lottery ticket scanned, only to discover that I had 4 numbers. I had won 58.00. Well the only thing to do with that was to have a night out, so }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 and I went into town last night for a meal and a drink, and had a really good night. Today we slept most of the morning, but so what. Tonight we\rquote re staying in, so we may get a video to watch. Tomorrow I\rquote 
m going back to Mam and Dads to complete some paperwork for them, and then wowee, back to work on Monday.
\par 
\par Work is very quiet at the minute, and I\rquote m finding myself getting quite defeated. What I feel like doing I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\cf6\insrsid4554742 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
\par 57 \endash  14}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par What a laugh we had last night. We went to the comedy night at Stanwix art theatre with }{\fs24\insrsid9006141 [friends]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . The entertainment was brilliant. Earlier we went to the Stanwix tandoori, so we made a full night out of it.

\par 
\par This week we\rquote re expecting to be very busy at work, so study is going to be quite hard. Tomorrow is bank holiday. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is off work, but unfortunately  I\rquote m working, which is a real downer. 

\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s back at work full time, however she was off on Friday with a bit of a flu like bug. She appears to have shaken it of now, so back to work on Tuesday.
\par 
\par This afternoon we\rquote re going through to Mam and Dads. Dad is bored at the minute. All the cattle are out, and so he has very little to do. He\rquote 
s offered to put a laminate floor down in our kitchen, which is really cool. We were thinking about changing the kitchen, but we\rquote re thinking now that new flooring may lighten the whole room up. We\rquote ll see how it goes.
\par 
\par 58  21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 st}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  April
\par This week has been our year end at work, so whilst the rings have been quiet, the financial side of things has been pretty active. Got everything sorted out 
on Friday however, so we should have a very quiet week this next week. Friday night we intended to go into town, but the bus didn\rquote 
t turn up, so we stayed in, got a Chinese and opened a bottle of wine. We had a good night just watching the television.
\par Last night we went into town with }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [four friends]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
. We ended up on Mood, after an excellent night. Little bit groggy today, which is what you get after a night in the town. Going through to Mam and Dads this afternoon, and then we\rquote ll have to finish 
painting, as the new carpets are arriving tomorrow. We\rquote 
re both very excited about the carpets arriving. We have had three weeks of torture, whilst we paint with the old carpets lifted. How people manage when they are carpeting the whole house, I can only g
uess. It has been difficult enough for us getting two rooms carpeted.
\par 
\par This next week will be very quiet. We have no sales on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, so what we\rquote ll end up doing I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par I\rquote ll be getting on with my stud towards the end of the week, but I\rquote ve got myself involved with this NVQ course at work, and it\rquote s taking more time up than I had hoped. Thing is once I\rquote ve got the qualification, I\rquote 
ve got it.
\par 
\par ? 59 
\par 
\par 60 5}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par A really busy week at work this week. We\rquote re having a lot of pedigree catt
le sales during the next two weeks. They have been really good sales so far, which is unusual, because they usually work in 3 year cycles. Last year was a really good year, so this year and next should have been really quiet.  So far, the opposite has bee
n the case which is good.
\par 
\par With work being so busy, it\rquote s quite late when I get home. Once through the door, I need to get my head down for study as my exam is in a few weeks.
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote s quite tired, so we aren\rquote t seeing a lot of each other. One good thing though is that after this weekend, I\rquote 
ll be getting home a lot earlier. As they say, no one ever gets to 70 and wishes they had spent more time in the office!
\par 
\par This weekend we\rquote re heading to Manchester to see }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [couple]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . It\rquote s great when we go down there, I think we adapt well to the Manchester way of life.
\par 
\par 61 \endash  12}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par I forgot what it was like to be really busy, but this last week has reminded me. It\rquote s chaos at work. Always is in May. We had a Belgian blue sale today, and it was horrendous. We had queues all afternoon, and we didn\rquote 
t get the last man away from the counter until 5:15. Every day has been pretty much like that, but we don\rquote t really complain, we make most of our money during May and the beginning of June. In fact, it\rquote s good to be busy. We shouldn\rquote 
t just tae it as granted.
\par 
\par Last weekend we went to Manchester. We went into Bury and had a brilliant night. Came home on Sunday with a bit of a heavy head. Ended up in bed at 8:30. We were shattered. We just don\rquote t seem to be able to stand these long nights out any more.

\par 
\par Tomorrow is the Young Farmers field day at Durdar. I\rquote m not really wanting to go to the field day, but }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is judging, so I\rquote m going to go along with her. Tomorrow night I\rquote 
m not going to the field day dance, I\rquote m going into town with M. After last weekend I\rquote m not sure if that is such a good idea.
\par 
\par 62 \endash  19}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May
\par Going into Carlisle last weekend was not a good idea. It was 3:00 in the morning when we eventually got into the house. Needed it though, made me forget about last week. Unfortunately, this week has been just as busy. Trying to fit some study in when I ho
me is very difficult. I just don\rquote t feel like picking a book up, but I\rquote m managing. Only two weeks until my exam. Soon be over, but how it will go who knows.
\par 
\par Last night we ended up at Rheged at Penrith. It was a gala dinner charity night for Carlisle Cathedr
al and Cumbria hospice at home. H&H had three table, and I was asked to host one of them. We had a really good night. Christine Hamilton was guest speaker and was really funny. We got home at about 12:00, after an excellent night.
\par 
\par Today I have been working which was a bit of a downer, however I was finished at about 3:00. We then went into town for the afternoon, and tonight we\rquote re staying in and having a bottle of wine.
\par 
\par 63 \endash  26}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  May (Eurovision song contest!!)
\par Well things have being getting a little quieter this week. We haven \lquote t had as many sales, and so we\rquote ve had a little time to catch breath. Most of the office Gossip has been about how we managed to get tickets to the  Gala dinner at Rheghed. 

\par 
\par Saturday night we stayed in, got a bottle of wine, and watched the Euro vision song contest. What a long night that was!!. Still, got a laugh when the results came.
\par Tonight we\rquote re going to a party at The How. I\rquote m not really looking forward to it, but I\rquote m sure it will turn out alright. We\rquote re going with }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [fcouple]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 , whom I\rquote 
ve never been out with before. So that should make for an interesting night.
\par 
\par The rest of my time is currently taken up with revising. You think that it\rquote s going well, and then when you test yourself, it\rquote s all gone right out of the window.. Th
e exam is next week, so very soon this course will all be over, providing I pass.
\par 
\par We\rquote re also trying to frantically decorate the house. We ordered some new carpets today, so we\rquote ve decided that everything needs painted before they are put down. The old carpets are absolutely shot at, so the time for replacement has come.

\par 
\par 64
\par A very quiet week at work this week. In fact it was a lot quieter for me because I was only in on Monday, Tuesday and Friday. I went to Newcastle on Tuesday for my exam on Wednesday. The exam went alright, but you never know. I thought that I\rquote 
d passed it last time, however in the end I failed which was a bit of a shock. Not a problem though as these things can be re sat. Got home about 2:00 on Wednesday afternoon. Once }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  had finished
 work we went to see the Matrix at the cinema, which I enjoyed. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  wasn\rquote t as enamoured as I was, but it was the first time we\rquote d been to the cinema for a few weeks.
\par 
\par Tonight I\rquote m staying in. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is going to one of her workmates birthdays, so I\rquote ve said that I\rquote ll pick them up when they\rquote 
re ready to come home. Probably end up picking them up at about 3:00 in the morning. Have got Spartacus to watch tonight. Never seen it before, so I\rquote m quite looking forward to it.
\par 
\par Last Saturday we went to a party at The How. It was at someone\rquote s house, who I didn\rquote t really know, but }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
 new him from work. We had an excellent night, and ended up getting home in the early hours of the morning. We went with }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [couple]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [she]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  works with }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  at the Bank street office, and }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [he]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  reports for Border TV. They are both a similar age to ourselves, and a really good laugh.
\par 
\par What I have seen at work was very quiet. We didn\rquote t have any sales on Tuesday and Thursday, so I didn\rquote t feel bad about being off for two days. It is quite
 unnerving when we go so quiet so quickly. From having queues out of the door, we now hardly have any customers in the office. It will be like this for the next two or three months, but that seems to be the way the company is going. More and more seasonal
.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742\charrsid4554742 65 2}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742\charrsid4554742 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4554742\charrsid4554742  June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4554742 
Interesting week this week. Went to Penrith in the middle if the week to meet with Kathy and the rest from Lancaster University. The night was really interesting, and you can see what the University has been working towards. Some of the infor
mation presented was quite hard hitting and made you think. In fact, it really really made you think about what has gone before. But like all things, it\rquote s happened and you just have to get on with your life.
\par 
\par These past 18 months have made you think about what you do ever day. Back in early 2002, we seemed to be trying to get back to \lquote normal\rquote , in the every day sense of the word. We then had another year of difficulty, when }{
\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  was off work for the majority of the year. This year has been the first time that we have really switched off for 24 months. Now that we are switched off, we\rquote 
re really enjoying it. Holiday, nights out, even Chinese meals. How things have moved on. 
\par 
\par This weekend we\rquote re going to Whitehaven maritime festival. It\rquote s the first time I\rquote ve been, so I\rquote m quite looking forward to it. I think that }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 \rquote 
s brother is going into town with us on the Saturday. That should be fun!
\par 
\par Last night we went to see Tim Vine the comedian. He was exceptionally funny, however after a while, he became very monotonous which was a shame. Won\rquote t be back home now for four days, so we\rquote ll see what happens over the weekend.
\par 
\par 
\par 66  9}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  June
\par 
\par After last week\rquote s meeting, I\rquote ve been thinking a lot. It seems like so long since I began writing these diaries, that they\rquote ve become a part of my life really. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  as if I\rquote 
ve completed this weeks diary, I get to Sunday, and remember that there is something that I\rquote m sure A few weeks and it will all be over.  
\par 
\par This week has been very quiet at work, and yet very busy at home. It has been the Royal highland Show at Edinburgh and so most of our staff have been attending the company show stand. We don\rquote 
t organise that many sales when the highland show is on. This is the first full year of agricultural shows for three years, and so we have a very busy calendar. At home we have been very busy decorating. We have new carpets arriving on the 30}{
\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  June which we are both really excited about. It seem strange to get excited about new carpets, but this is the first major thing which }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  and I h
ave really organised for the house together.
\par I hit upon the now not so bright idea of decorating everything that came in contact with the carpet so that we wouldn\rquote t have to decorate when the carpet was down. Every night we have been decorating. If I didn\rquote t
 find it so relaxing, I would say that I was mad.
\par 
\par Saturday night we stayed in which was great. Our first night in for ages. We got a pack of Coors beer and watched Shakespeare in }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 L}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 ove. This morning we went to a membership service for a friend of ours. She
 was being accepted into the Methodist church, and so it was a big event for her. We then went for lunch at Papcastle which was excellent. 
\par 
\par This next week should also be very quiet. It is the Royal Show at Stoneleigh next weekend, and so we will be preparing for that. I don\rquote 
t know how, but somehow I seem to have missed been invited to any of the current batch of shows. Perhaps they are saving me for July?
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  is fully back at work now, and is really enjoying herself. She has been back at work full time continuously for 7 weeks, and so things are looking very good. We\rquote 
re both really settled at work at the minute, and so we\rquote re both very chilled. 
\par 
\par Tonight we\rquote ve opened a bottle of wine, and we\rquote re just dossing around the house. I\rquote ve decorated for most of the afternoon, and now I\rquote m taking a hard earned rest, whilst watching James Bond. }{\fs24\insrsid12143426 [wife]}{
\fs24\insrsid4554742  is reading the newspapers, but  to be honest what is in them isn\rquote t worth the effort. I spent 10 minutes looking through them myself before and there was nothing in them.
 Is this what happens. People begin to go on holiday, and suddenly the new stops.
\par 
\par 70 16}{\fs24\super\insrsid4554742 th}{\fs24\insrsid4554742  June
\par This week has been our year end at work, so whilst the rings have been quiet, the financial side of things has been pretty active. Got everything sorted out on 
Friday however, so we should have a very quiet week this next week. Friday night we stayed in, got a Chinese and opened a bottle of wine. We had a good night just watching the television.
\par Last night we went into town with }{\fs24\insrsid13379826 [four friends]}{\fs24\insrsid4554742 . We e
nded up on Mood, after an excellent night. Little bit groggy today, which is what you get after a night in the town. Going through to Mam and Dads this afternoon, and then we\rquote ll have to finish painting, as the new carpets are arriving tomorrow. We
\rquote re both 
very excited about the carpets arriving. We have and three weeks of torture, whilst we paint with the old carpets lifted. How people manage when they are carpeting the whole house, I can only guess. It has been difficult enough for us getting two rooms ca
rpeted.
\par 
\par 
\par }}