{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super 
\sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1132174\rsid2440523\rsid2571664\rsid4263866\rsid5317725\rsid5577388\rsid7162029\rsid7495878\rsid8782690\rsid11366997\rsid11892178\rsid12387615\rsid16398066}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min51}{\version12}{\edmins11}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords6583}{\nofchars37525}{\*\company UKDA}{\nofcharsws44020}
{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot5317725 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid11892178 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid11892178 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid11892178 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid11892178 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid11892178 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid5317725 Lancaster University}{\insrsid11892178 
\par Interview ID:  PM13
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid11892178 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid7495878 6}}}{\cs17\insrsid11892178 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid11892178 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid11892178 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\ul\insrsid11892178 Date of Interview: 19/03/02
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid11892178 Date of birth: 1947
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid11892178 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid11892178 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid11892178 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid11892178 \chftn }{\insrsid11892178  }{\b\insrsid11892178 Group 1 }{\insrsid11892178 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid11892178 Group 2 }{\insrsid11892178 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid11892178 Group 3 }{\insrsid11892178 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid11892178 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid11892178 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid11892178 Group 5 }{\insrsid11892178 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid11892178 Group 6 }{\insrsid11892178 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid11892178 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid11892178 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid11892178 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b0\i\insrsid11892178 Interview took place in the respondent\rquote 
s kitchen in the house he shares with his partner and their 7 year old son. The house newly built as part of a small close off the village road had numerous faults which were being repaired. At the time of the intervi
ew a builder was breaking roughcast off the outside of the house using a jackhammer, this made the tape very difficult to transcribe. I had suggested moving the interview to another room but respondent preferred to remain where he was. The interview conta
ins some frank information about his family and step-family which is not directly relevant to this study. I suggested turning off the tape when he was talking about these matters but he was happy to put everything on record.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\i\fs24\insrsid11892178 A council tip, used for the disp
osal of animal carcasses in 2001 is  close to his house}{\fs24\insrsid11892178 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b0\insrsid11892178 
\par }{\insrsid11892178 So you\rquote re saying it\rquote s made you think about it?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid11892178 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah, ye know when we had that meeting,
\par 
\par Mm
\par 
\par  I came out of that and I though bloody hell I feel guilty cos I, er, to me of course, to me it wasn\rquote 
t happening to me, it was just a bit of a nuisance, er, such as when we were going over Shap, nobody bothered with washing vehicles ye know, not until, it seems as if was government policy to, they said oh we wash so many cars a week.  So every time they 
washed a car a mark went up on the board, in fact what about all the months beforehand? what about the vehicles coming the other way? and it wasn\rquote t compulsory so if I was in a hurry \lquote cos I go over Shap every day virtually, if I was in a }{
\f0\insrsid7495878 hurry for}{\f0\insrsid11892178  whatever reason you didn\rquote t  call in, if I wasn\rquote t bothered I\rquote d call in and changed over cos I was usually driving , changed over with the learner,
\par 
\par Yeah
\par 
\par In there , and er, ye got to know people.  They\rquote re quite, quite friendly, ye know, but there was an occasion where another instructor who was in a hurry, and they chased after him and stopped him on top of\rquote 
t fell and they threatened him with prosecution.  
\par 
\par Really?
\par 
\par Well he said was it compulsory?  And he was, he was upset but he was in a hurry, and they said when he come back, kinda, he\rquote d to call in and get washed, but it was a bit illogical cos you\rquote 
ve already travelled round.  So I felt  they were just keeping figures, so they can turn round at the end of the day and say, so many thousand vehicles we washed in such a
nd such a period and that was on twenty four hours a day. and luckily I think this was my er, as I say I thought (inaudible 013 the focus group meeting at Penrith) it made me think a little bit, especially, I tell you here who impressed more than anybody 
was the Vicar.   And I suddenly realised that guy was thrown right in the deep and he was doing, he couldn\rquote 
t move out of his house so he was having to counsel over the phone, and he suddenly realised what an important role he was playing.  Because for anybo
dy that has a problem you need someone to talk to and erm and he came over as a very genuine man.  Except he lost his street cred when he started to talk about, er, the er, the sheep suddenly went quiet when he gave the prayer.  ye know. I was brought up 
with religion, we\rquote re very strong in (119) anyway that\rquote s all back in history but er working round here.  but anyway I think he was doing a good job, and also I found talking to such as }{\f0\insrsid2440523 [name]}{\f0\insrsid11892178 
, ye know  on a Sunday night
\par 
\par Yeah
\par 
\par he was saying, he\rquote d, he has an answering machine and it takes twenty six calls, er, call minder or whatever it is, he was saying it was chocca and he couldn\rquote 
t get enough on and he says I replied to every one.  People were phoning him up, some were angry, some just wanted to know what to
 do, and so on, and so, well, I got the impression that erm, how can you say it, it just went through my mind then, so I got the impression ..........that people really wanted to know what should I do in the situation?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 It\rquote s alright I\rquote m just moving it nearer (tape machine) It\rquote s like the Flintstones
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid7495878 What, what, what, can I do in the situation, and what I\rquote m beginning to read was, after reading a bit of articles in the papers, cos it keeps getting mentioned.  }{\f0\insrsid11892178 I only get one paper a week, that\rquote 
s the, the Saturday Telegraph, just nobody to read it, er, and there\rquote s quite a lot on farming.  unfortunately, and I got the impression that people wanted just guidance.  what should I do in this situation?, because they\rquote 
re taken out of the norm and if they have the guidance they can, ye know, a set plan, of what to do, they\rquote re quite happy with it, and once that\rquote s settled they\rquote ll just get on with it, an otherwise it\rquote 
s what, what do I do in this situation and so they\rquote re having to phone such as the (inaudible 033) or the NFU er representative to get guidance.  and I think we as ordinary people, well myself as an ordinary person, so, it\rquote 
s just like how is a farmer, as I think I was telling you at that meeting if, if a firm closes down, in, in Carlisle, seven hundred people fall out of work, it doesn\rquote t affect them, so they\rquote re not bothered about it, it\rquote 
s the same for myself, ye know, it doesn\rquote t really affect me,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Did it affect your work at all?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Just er, erm, yeah, in the fact that er, made it a bit awkward for one or two country folk  I was taking er (name inaudible 039) from up at er, off fellside there they\rquote re big farmers there, and he couldn\rquote 
t take his lessons cos he didn\rquote t want to come off the farm, 
\par 
\par Yeah
\par 
\par but it didn\rquote t affect me financially because, I\rquote m overworked to start with, so, it was oh well I\rquote ll see you in a few weeks time
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes, it didn\rquote t actually hurt you
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 It didn\rquote t hurt me, didn\rquote t hurt the business, same as out at erm, Newton Rigg, I was taking quite a few from Newton Rigg and suddenly it all  stoppe
d because, because they cancelled but  was just immediately replaced by somebody else, so financially it didn\rquote t, didn\rquote t affect me, it just caused a little bit of a hiccup but then you just get it back again later. , er, so I\rquote 
m taking, some more farmers}{\f0\insrsid5317725  }{\f0\insrsid11892178 that couldn\rquote t take it then, would take, ye know, just came at a period.  So financially didn\rquote t affect me, erm, just, just hiccups  that\rquote s all.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 How about this disposal site, is it, it\rquote s directly behind here isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 If you looked out of here now we\rquote ve got seventy five,  hundred yards away, no more than that, er, when they were tipping, it didn\rquote 
t particularly affect us, we, we could hear this going on in the night and you got, you got some of those nights when the air\rquote s kind of still  we got the smell coming from the decomposing carcasses, not from when they were put in the ground but it
\rquote s when they were tipping them
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes, and they were moving
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 They were moving them about and they were moving the rubbish, apparently they were stirring up the old er, the old tip it gives a gas off as well,  the benefit however, I think that tip\rquote 
s now cleaner than it ever has been.  I was up there on, on Sunday, took some rubbish up on Sunday morning, \lquote cos it\rquote s handy, just drove round and they seem to be landscaping it now, and it\rquote s looking very tidy indeed, but it\rquote 
s very well organised. They they\rquote ve tightened up on restrictions for entry and, and in and out of the place
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 It\rquote s one that people can go to and take their garden rubbish and that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 That\rquote s right yeah, yeah, On a Sunday morning they queue  to put their stuff in, it\rquote s, it\rquote s, it\rquote s amazing how er, it\rquote s going all the time with people depositing things that usually they can\rquote 
t get out to their ashcans.  Ye know er, it\rquote s a busy place on a Sunday, and as I say the tip itself is looking very clean and tidy, we don\rquote t get any smell from it.  we\rquote ve got someone to come to see what happens but I don\rquote 
t think we (inaudible 060) they\rquote ve managed it very well, there\rquote s, they\rquote ve got, We\rquote ve got a letter just this week they\rquote re opening a, they\rquote re having like an open day on the tip to come and have a visit, they\rquote 
re certainly doing their best to put everybody at ease I have no problems with it and neither has wife  and talking to people down the village they\rquote ve not got a problem with it er, we\rquote ve more problem with the house coming to bits
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Laugh
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Erm, what else could I say about it
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Were you affected with the fires when they were
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Er .............not affected with the fires directly, the, the, there was only one fire that, that I think did cause a problem for a while, was when they burned at Errington\rquote 
s, that was the first, the first burn. And the smoke blew over this way, it, i
t, struck here a little bit, you could smell it in the air, but I was driving ye know driving round all the time you were picking up, up the smoke.  erm again it was more nuisance, ye, ye didn\rquote t try to drive through it. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 No
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par I was taking people that, that, like the }{\f0\insrsid5577388 [}{\f0\insrsid16398066 family}{\f0\insrsid5577388 ]}{\f0\insrsid11892178 
 at the alpaca centre, I was taking their two children driving at that period and they were fighting er, what to say, cat and er, er, tooth and nail that\rquote s the word isn\rquote t it, er, not to, not to have their alpacas put down, cos they\rquote 
re wanting to put them down, and they fought.  I think they, there\rquote s only a few of them put down in one region near Greystoke but they managed to keep their stock, they were trying to prove that the alpacas didn\rquote 
t carry it, that alpacas couldn\rquote t get foot and mouth, ye know, it\rquote s er, they put up a good fight, and they were a little, not really distressed but, but just in a fighting mood if that makes sense, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par to keep what they\rquote d already got, cos they\rquote d already just given up a business, at Lowther Park cos they had the erm, they ran Lowther Park there
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 What the leisure centre?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 The leisure centre, and they\rquote d sort of pulled out bought this and did this alpaca centre and of course as you know now they shut the park down
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 They\rquote ve shut it now the park bit haven\rquote t they? yes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes, that was just the erm, the nail in the coffin last year, that gave them the, that gave them the excuse to get off, cos it was, it was a struggle of a business,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Er, \lquote cos they are circus people, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Oh are they? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par Well and truly, they used to do, they had a touring circus years ago they\rquote ve just settled in there, lovely people, absolutely lovely people, ye know, quite comical when you talk to them\'85.  so
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 How about your wider family and friends, have they been affected at all?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
Well my best, best mate is, he was erm he was in fact the fourth generation on the farm at er, Johnby and er, the farms around him got foot and mouth so obviously he was in the catchment  area and while it was on he was devastated he helped to actually to
 cull his own, his own stock but he just didn\rquote t feel up to cleaning up, and he regrets now not taking the money, to clean up
\par 
\par Yes
\par 
\par but at the time he was deeply distressed cos you can imagine, he was like a very hard working lad he was noted for it,  erm ye know obviously working seven days a week his son\rquote s not really interested in farming, well he is, but he isn\rquote t, he
\rquote s son\rquote s sort of early twenties, he, he\rquote s a bit of a  }{\f0\insrsid1132174 \'85}{\f0\insrsid11892178  won\rquote t get up on a  Sunday morning er.  but anyways he found that er, although they\rquote re 
the fourth generation on, he gave it up, he took the money and decided that\rquote s me off the farm, and he managed to hand his notice in, it broke his heart to do it, but in the meantime the bit of land he had  had already started before that
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid8782690 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Sorry can I, it was a rented farm he was on
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 It was a rented farm, but he also had, he owned like another three quarters of a farm which is easiest way of describing it in size and bits of land round about,  but he still kept hold of those, he give up the rented side and 
realised that ye know, coming into, he into his fifties, what was he working on the farm for? seven days a week.  he found a big shock, a massive shock.  It was the two months when his stock was killed,  his stock was killed his stock was killed off and t
hen what do I do with myself and he was, he was at a loss, and he was waking up in a morning and he\rquote d think well there\rquote s nothing to do, I mean he was just, for every day of his life since a little boy he\rquote 
d always worked, going back to the old farm where he, well some day son this is yours, so he\rquote d work on the farm and known that he always had your jobs to do and suddenly he\rquote 
d lost it, and he was lost.  but then he started finding, bits of this and bits of that to do, doing odd. odd jobs for contracting and so, and now he\rquote s saying , best thing that happened, got him off the farm,  he\rquote 
s enjoying life better now than he ever has done, er, his wife isn\rquote t as hyper, she\rquote s, she\rquote s calmed down, erm, cos suddenly they don\rquote t have the books to do. they\rquote ve started, up the
, the time they was trying to get a caravan site going which is moving on in stages and doing quite well, that\rquote s, that\rquote s building up in it\rquote s own way.  a static caravan site it is.  erm, but it has made it\rquote s mark, there\rquote 
s all, all sorts of aid supposed to be there, and, this was even discussed the other night, and it seems to be just a little bit of a sham, er, he went to a meeting just about two or three weeks ago, it wouldn\rquote 
t even be that, two weeks ago, er, Newton Rigg and he felt that yes, you all had to register your names, and it was all supposed to be this aid which they\rquote d applied for a long time ago
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 This the kind of business link
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Whatever it is, I don\rquote t know what, I can\rquote t, give you the, it would be wrong for me to say
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 But are we talking about financial help to start businesses or is it advice?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Just advice and maybe financial help, they, retraining and so on, they\rquote d applied for retraining and nothing ever came of it.  er, you begin to find that there\rquote s things said but nothing happens.  and he feels 
that he went to this meeting now and all the rest of it he probably he felt that they\rquote d got quite a group there, the meeting was a bit of a shambles it wasn\rquote 
t particularly well organised,  and erm, they were just had a bit of a discussion amongst themselve
s and cleared off and then he thought that for every person there, Newton Rigg would  get so much per head and he felt that, he felt that yeah, ye can see where the money\rquote s gone.
\par 
\par Mm
\par 
\par  er, is it coming direct is it getting to the person, that\rquote s that\rquote s needing the help and assistance?  erm, cos he, he thinks that yeah a lot of retraining, people just want, don\rquote 
t want to go into farming, ye know just give up the farm, cos they\rquote ve never known anything else.  er, but, it, he is now quite happy,  but as I said h
e rather have not gone through any of it and still been on the farm, still working seven days a weeks, knowing no different, if that makes sense, 
\par 
\par Yes, yes it does.
\par although he\rquote s happy being off it.  But he\rquote d never known anything else and it was such a big shock to him.  Er, family, my sister\rquote s got }{\f0\insrsid12387615 [a]}{\f0\insrsid11892178 
 business down at er Greystoke Ghyll  and they have farm land as well but they let that off and that hit them of course cos the animals () they find antique business went \'85 ooh  cos living  out in the country
, Greystoke Ghyll, which is just two and a half mile away, erm ye weren\rquote t  getting visitors coming through, so they\rquote re books  just absolutely went flat, and I notice now for the first time in his life he isn\rquote 
t working for, sister runs the business, he has a little bit of a milk round, scratty little bit of a milk round, he\rquote s now added on working in a three quarter time job I would call it, cos he\rquote s finished early in the morning so he\rquote 
s working the rest of the day for a friend in engineering and he\rquote s enjoying it actually, and he was just saying oh I wish I\rquote d done this years ago, cos he would never work for anybody in his life, ye know, he\rquote s fifty five year old, 

\par 
\par The steady income?
\par 
\par well it isn\rquote t so much the income, believe it or not I think when ou\rquote ree getting into fifties income, isn\rquote t that important, er, I know it isn\rquote t to me.  Financially I\rquote 
m worse off now than I was years ago, cos, changing lives, changing wives, women cost money, 
\par 
\par Laughter
\par 
\par er, that\rquote s another story, I know I\rquote ve gone downbank financially, it cost us a lot, I\rquote d quite a nice lifestyle, I\rquote 
d be retired, I planned to retire at fifty. I was at the police just a few years few years and decided when I came out in my mid, oh it would be late twenties,  that by the time I was fifty I wante
d to do the same as the other policemen retired and not working,  so I\rquote d built a business and everything was great everything was fine, and er, then er, life wasn\rquote 
t what it should have been at home and I took a step elsewhere.   That well that\rquote s another story, that\rquote s an interesting story.  I\rquote d a, I\rquote d a lovely wife and unfortunately she\rquote d like drink too much, erm, and she\rquote 
s in a home now for the rest of her life due to the alcoholic illness which is quite a sad thing really. Came out with two lovely daughters out of that marriage  which I\rquote m very close to, but now I\rquote 
ve started again with another young family so, of my own,  seven year old boy and I\rquote ve a wayward er stepdaughter who is unfortunately at the moment she\rquote s a heroin addict, give you an idea,  she just gone way off the rails.  and that\rquote 
s one of the problems round this area, 
\par 
\par Really?
\par 
\par She\rquote s a bonny girl and she\rquote s just wasted herself (inaudible 156) 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Does she live with you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Erm, yes and no, not for the last week or two, she\rquote s, er, she\rquote s been here and coming and going.  she\rquote s phoned up last night at one o\rquote clock and I just put the phone down.  Ye get these weird things, she
\rquote s just, she\rquote s with this boyfriend who is actually a drug dealer, and I think that\rquote s where she went wrong
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Are you happy with this on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Oh, it doesn\rquote t bother me in\rquote t least , I know there, (laugh) it, well, unless you want to knock it off, it doesn\rquote t bother me, no, I\rquote m just rambling on,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 No, it\rquote s interesting
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 She\rquote s, she\rquote s got problems, er, but that\rquote s not related to foot and mouth is it
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 No, but it\rquote s, it\rquote s related to you isn\rquote t it, part of your wider family?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 But I don\rquote t have any great, funnily enough although it\rquote s, though I\rquote ve  brought her up since she was nine year old there\rquote s a void,  it isn\rquote t like your own children, no matter how hard you try, there
\rquote s that gap.  Although she isn\rquote t, she isn\rquote t, her father\rquote s an alcoholic so, er, she doesn\rquote t really get on well with him, ye know, it, I, I could never bridge that gap, although you try, you try, and even now you try an
d you just like, it\rquote s just, it\rquote s just something\rquote s missed, I think if you, you lose your children in the first few years, er, it\rquote s hard to catch em, later on.  They\rquote ve already been formed, mentally, at an early age, it
\rquote s like farming, come back to your farming,  ye know if ......one of the things I\rquote ve come across now, a lot of,  I take a lot of farmer\rquote s son\rquote s and daughter\rquote s, and they\rquote 
re not interested in farming, only an odd one, then, the theory I\rquote ve come up with is that years ago, you remember I was talkin
g about  saying just shortly the friend, he was brought up at an early age with sitting on tractors before he could reach the pedals, he was doing jobs round the farm, from a very early age.  Well you tend to find that what happens now, you're not allowed
 to have your children around the farm, you\rquote ve to keep the children away from machinery, keep them, they\rquote ve got to be certain ages.  And by that time you\rquote ve lost them to the farming industry, they\rquote 
re not being brought up with it, and it\rquote s all something new to them.  And suddenly at sixteen year you\rquote re saying  right now you can do \'85you\rquote re useful now, but they\rquote ve already got their minds elsewhere.  and er, I think it
\rquote s, ye know it\rquote s a, it\rquote s what you do in the early years, to get them interested, so I can\rquote t sto
p work.  I was always brought up to work, I was brought up in pubs originally, I was bred and born in em, but my father took ill, so from an early age we had to get up in a morning to clean bars out, this is seven or eight year old.  We all had our little
 
set jobs to do, we used to fight over actually cleaning bars out cos there was always money, we kept the money that was found.  we never got pocket money but we, we could keep what we found in the bar-room floor and so it was a fight who was going to do i
t each morning, between myself and two sisters.  er, but you were brought up to work, we worked seven days a week, so it was natural for me I work seven days a week, it\rquote s not hard, I don\rquote t think it\rquote s work, well it\rquote 
s play, I love life, ye know so, in fact I enjoy life now more than ever.  er, but er, that\rquote s just me and I\rquote m always changing things. At the moment  I\rquote ve taken on two new jobs in this last ........ three months actually, so I\rquote 
m trying to cut back the Learner side
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par  erm, started teaching off-road and then management days for Greystoke Castle, it\rquote s a big drop in income, saying about income not being involved my income\rquote s gone down, \lquote cos I\rquote m not being paid as much an hour but I enjoy.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Is that these sort of courses that they do up there er
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 That\rquote s right aye, yeah, so I\rquote m getting trained  into that, and it\rquote s, I\rquote d pay them to go, it\rquote s er, it is absolutely a pleasure and he\rquote 
s a wonderful man, is Neville Howard.  ye see, there, Greystoke Park never got a, they never lost their stock yet all around them went down, the castle lost a tremendous amount of money with the foot and mouth \lquote cos they couldn\rquote 
t use the, the land, of course, so it knocked them way back, but luckily with the foot and mouth, did I say luckily, the, people e
mployed as instructors were able to find jobs with erm, er, with the cleaning up the foot and mouth shall we say. so that that took the pressure off him there, he also found that Oasis, used to then send people up to Greystoke to ride mini-quads, then the
y moved them up to erm, Oasis, so he does it up at Oasis, and that\rquote s brilliant because now more people want to ride them because it\rquote s handy for them at Oasis.  so he\rquote 
s actually got a benefit out of it (phone rings, tape stops while he answers it) 
\par 
\par yeah, what was I on about?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Greystoke
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Greystoke yeah, so he\rquote s benefit, he\rquote s lost a lot of money I should imagine, but there\rquote s, there\rquote s good out of it came, he\rquote s now operating it up at Oasis,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par  they got some land up there and er, it\rquote s now a busy part of his, his, what can I say his business I would say.  er, so that, so there\rquote s a little bit benefits coming in that way, erm, who else can I say affected?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 How about your social life, did it affect you going out at all, or, I guess you were out a lot anyway weren\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah well, I didn\rquote t say yeah, erm, what can I say?  erm...social life, I\rquote m always working, but I do go, I\rquote m a, I\rquote m a, well I\rquote 
m a freemason, I, I quite er, you get a position where you go into a chair so you, two years of it instead of one year of it.  but the (inaudible }{\f0\insrsid5317725 -}{\f0\insrsid11892178  lodge visits? ) such as Appleby, \lquote 
cos you do a lot of visiting, at Appleby and Kirkby Stephen were curtailed, \lquote cos of the, \lquote cos nobody wanted to bring into a lodge.   \lquote cos ye know, they\rquote re mainly farming people at these lodges, erm, and such as next week there
\rquote s a ceremony I\rquote ll be doing at Appleby for example, but it wasn\rquote t done last year, they cancelled it.  we didn\rquote t see the Appleby lads as much, but now it\rquote s all swinging again and everybody\rquote 
s happy and actually, actually the hiccups made it,  well, the break for a period for a lot of them made it more interesting.  See you come back to thing you get away from the routine, ye know you get away from the routine when you come back to it it
\rquote s a lot more interesting,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Fresh eyes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah, my dart, oh I play darts on a Sunday night as well, the darts season, they couldn\rquote 
t have the presentation night if that means anything.  the village hall, the village hall couldn't be used as much, erm, so that was, that was laid off till later in the year, I actually missed the presentation, forgot about it, er \lquote cos you don
\rquote t do like that in the summer, the erm, Sunday game, farming lads had to go missing, (inaudible ) wasn\rquote t that serious, it\rquote s just (inaudible ) a night out.  Sailing side, couldn\rquote t get on
to the lake for a couple of months, erm, had to do like spray the boat with acid before we, we got to Pooley Bridge,  and we had to put this stuff we had to spray on and as soon as we got into it washes off again immediately ye know don\rquote 
t know how it\rquote s going to affect the, the boat.  erm, again I, I often felt there was bits of panic, I can\rquote 
t see how, a lot of the measures taken, how it would really prevent, ye know, ye ask somebody, how  does it, how is it transmitted? and they\rquote ll say oh with contact, or it\rquote 
s airborne, or its, ye think oh come on, nobody seems to really put their fingers to it, just clinging on.  it\rquote 
s like when I first called in to get the car washed off on Shap, they used to just spray round the wheels which is on the outside and a little, ye know, just spray under the arches, and, that was it, it only took, it only took seconds to do, there\rquote 
s one on each side of the car and you drove through quickly, very efficient, and then after a month or so, they then started putting rubber gloves on a
nd just put their hands over the wheel arches, put their hands inside the wheel arches knock some of the mud off, and er, you\rquote re thinking yes, er, how come it matters now and it didn\rquote 
t then what about the other week? if you ever look under the vehicle there\rquote s parts, ye can\rquote t clean it, ye know what I mean, it\rquote s only just a like a token effect.  ye had, it\rquote s how it\rquote 
s spread, like such as  my friend I said anything around him got, foot and mouth, he had sheep, against somebody else that was absolutely spotless and clean on his farm wouldn\rquote 
t allow anybody on he kept them off, and yet his sheep nudging onto theirs and his sheep didn\rquote t catch it but the sheep next door did.  In er, and I can\rquote t see, I can\rquote t fathom it out, 
\par 
\par No
\par 
\par and I don\rquote t think a lot of, lot of so called, er, people in charge could either.  er, and I think blaming the government was totally wrong as well, ye\rquote ve got, and Blair trying to think he could control it was another silly thing, it\rquote 
s just something that, it\rquote s just an epidemic yeah, yes you have to put up  restrictions and obviously need to stop it travelling too far through the country but you can\rquote t control, it\rquote s, it has a mind of it\rquote s own basically.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 You think it\rquote s just like an act of nature really, of one of those
\par 
\par }\pard \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid11892178 We get \lquote flu, the thing is human beings we get \lquote flu epidemics, why does an area get \lquote 
flu and another part of the country doesn\rquote t get any?  People travel back and forward but why is it restricted, it\rquote s, a bit of luck a bit of this, a bit of the other ye know, er, I can remember, well I won\rquote 
t say (inaudible ) you do get areas where things occurred in one area and doesn\rquote t seem to go anywhere else for some reason, and yet people going back and forward.  er, and it\rquote s like this disease there\rquote s some parts of the world appa
rently don\rquote t bother with it  ye know just, let it ride on,  er but I think it, I think it\rquote 
s bad talk they talk about the government set it off and this sort of thing these are just rumours, whenever anything ever happens, people always pick up, oh it\rquote s happen, they\rquote ll always build rumours up.  er, it\rquote 
s like a little story, a little remark made,  and it\rquote s er a bit of a passed on to one or two ears it gets into a big story.  er, my father was good one at that actually, he, he as I say he was a landlord, there
 was a lovely story teller my father.  we had, we had such as a pub in Penrith, (Fish hotel? inaudible) which is now the (inaudible ) where I was born at, and they were closing pubs all over the town, and there was a period in the fifties, and people were
 always coming and asking about it.  what\rquote s going to happen to the Fish it\rquote s going to close, \lquote 
cos he was leaving it and he was waiting for another pub to move into and he was looking for the right place. and in a remark he made one night, oh Marks and Spenc
ers is buying it, and he just made this casual remark, and, nothing, thought no more about it,  and a fortnight later it\rquote s in the Herald, Marks and Spencers is coming to Penrith, and then there was debate in the paper about would Marks\rquote 
 shut little shopkee
pers.  it would wipe the little shopkeepers out.  and there was all these debates and it went on for months and months and there was letters back and forwards in the Herald, and it was only just a casual throw away remark that had, that he\rquote 
d said, this is how rumours got round, and they had it in black and white that they were coming into Penrith.  and Marks\rquote  had been nowhere near the place hadn\rquote t even considered it.  but it caused such a stir, it\rquote s, it\rquote 
s how rumours, rumours are caused, but he was quite good a that.  he, sometimes his little remarks that got mislead, it\rquote 
s like, we moved away from here, came back to Penrith, and erm, he, he moved back into another  pub, and erm, a reporter came up and said what brought you back to Penrith?  well what can you
 can answer to it ye know?  oh well it was the call of the beacon, that brought us back, I\rquote 
ve got to live within the sight of the beacon, so it was on the front page of the Herald of the paper, the call of the beacon brings landlord back again.  and it wen
t rambling on about how it, and it was just my dad just rambling he was just, he was just talking like that, well I do it sometimes, but he had, he had this blarney way of putting things. people believed it, things get out of context, ye know, Chinese whi
spers I often call it, so I think, lot of, there\rquote s a lot of talk gone on, that\rquote s erm a lot of it\rquote s false.  and newspapers doing things wrong and twisting things round, but, er
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Did you follow the press coverage while it was all going on, see much of it, weekly paper?
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par Just the er, er, weekly paper and the, the Herald, ye know there\rquote s two Saturday papers
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par The Herald had a lot of coverage didn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah, it you read the odd bit but then it gets a bit erm, monotonous, you feel oh yeah poor fellow yeah, it\rquote s business, ye know you realised he\rquote ll either get compensation\'85
  I can remember erm, work with him in the early days I was out with Jim Walton one night er, he runs the Toyota  agency in Penrith and saying oh, \lquote cos we had a common friend in }{\f0\insrsid12387615 [name]}{\f0\insrsid11892178 ,  and I says }{
\f0\insrsid12387615 [name}{\f0\insrsid11892178 \rquote s}{\f0\insrsid12387615 ]}{\f0\insrsid11892178  suffering hard here, he says he won\rquote t be he says he\rquote ll be happy afterwards he says, I says you\rquote ll   be, suffering, there won\rquote 
t be money for vehicles, he says I\rquote m maybe  not selling now but I\rquote ll have a hey day.  he says its happened, and he went 
 back in time to the sixties when it occurred and he said we had a great, he says it hits you for a while he says and then they\rquote ve got the money to spend he says and they\rquote 
re not going to put it back into farming a lot of them. He says what do they want to spend it on? Their cars a little bit older now he says their going to buy another new car and new vehicles.  he says again, he says you\rquote 
ve just got to wait, so the weak ones\rquote ll go down he says the strong ones\rquote ll come through.  and he was quite, he wasn\rquote t worried in the least, \lquote 
cos he was, he mentioned his sales were down, but talking to him recently and er, apparently things have picked back up and hunkydory and everything happy, and he was right
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Do you think that could be the case in Penrith in general, that because there\rquote s been so many people gone down round here that it might actually bring some money in for different things
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes, yes quite true, there\rquote s good, comes back in again, it comes back round.  the money soon comes round again, in fact overall an
d this was one of the other things that came out of this discussion on Sunday night, there was quite a bit of discussion actually, er, especially with a few pints, that the county overall has made money, out of foot and mouth, it\rquote 
s brought a lot of money in, and there\rquote s a lot, a lot of people\rquote ve made money which then gets cast out again to other people, there\rquote s a lot of people suffered don\rquote t (inaudible) there\rquote 
s a lot of people suffered very much so, , but overall there\rquote s been an increase in money to the county, er, so the county should benefit, if you look at it overall as a county, we\rquote ve benefited, erm
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Was that the feeling in your discussion on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah, final opinion is when it comes down to brass tacks there\rquote s a guy there sitting that\rquote s going down he\rquote s facing debt in a big way, he\rquote s
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Was he somebody who kept his stock?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 He kept his stock and he was only small, he couldn\rquote t move his stock,  he couldn\rquote t sell his stock so he had all the problems, he didn\rquote t get the compensation, or he doesn\rquote t know how to 
get anything.  er, but you\rquote ve got other guys that went out of it, the earlier, the ones that got caught first, er, I think benefited better than ones that caught later, there\rquote 
s a discrepancy in prices as well, some gained, but no-one, no-one lost.  er, some of the images that were mentioned wasn\rquote t nice. One of them had mentioned he\rquote d, he\rquote d had a, he  said it\rquote s funny, doesn\rquote t, doesn\rquote 
t upset him, said but I keep having this, the thought on it.  erm, they were shooting the cattle in, in the field and one had h
ad a calf just a few days, few days old.  so the mother was shot and the calf was hanging around the mother and he said then that was shot he said and the bullet went through and blew the back of the brains out like something you see on, television, ye kn
ow these, 
\par 
\par Yeah
\par 
\par he says he\rquote d never seen anything like it, he said he doesn\rquote t, doesn\rquote t traumatise him he say but he says I still see that image, of the young calf being with it\rquote s head being blown out er from a distance, \lquote 
cos it was done from a distance.  er, but it didn't, as I say the trauma wasn\rquote t there we were talking about trauma.  but him himself says farming just goes on.  and as regards farming well, it\rquote 
s all part of, UK plc if you want to call it that.  it\rquote s all business from abroad.  farmers tend to, have thought themselves, it really should make them rethink, er, about, working for little money.  you think of the money they\rquote 
re investing for the return they\rquote re getting, it\rquote s a very poor business,  and the thought was,  that came out of it, probably the big company ye know the Tescos and what}{\f0\insrsid5317725  }{\f0\insrsid11892178 have}{\f0\insrsid5317725  }{
\f0\insrsid11892178 you, the big supermarkets will take over farming and become big business, but it\rquote s still cheaper to bring food in from abroad and business wise, er, they were giving an example of some African state or an other they\rquote 
d sent eighty million pounds worth of beef into this country there\rquote d been a bit of a stink about it.  and these farmers, oh yeah just selling us down the road, but he said think of it another way, we just sold them three hundred and sixty million p
ounds worth of hydro-electrics so who\rquote s come better off? The farmers had to lose, the UK plc made money, its business and if you think overall in the bigger field, instead of individually the country\rquote s doing alright.  the farming, we don
\rquote t really need the farming,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 I bet you were popular in this discussion, what did, what did }{\b\f0\insrsid2571664 [NFU rep]}{\b\f0\insrsid11892178  say about that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 That was the man that said,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Did he?
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Because he was, he was at a meeting, this is maybe talking out of school,  he was at a meeting, er some big dinner or whatever it was, and he didn\rquote 
t have the ear of the, he had one of the, not junior but, in between should I say, I won\rquote t say who the minister was and he had his ear, and he was giving it, and he was trying to give him a bit of a, going on about this eighty million pounds, 
\lquote cos it was all in the Sunday papers, and he said well think of it another way we\rquote ve just sold them, 300 million,  we\rquote ve got, we\rquote ve got to take something back.  and you could see the point, there\rquote s a business cause, you
\rquote ve to think this country\rquote s a business, what\rquote s the point in supporting something that erm, you\rquote re not making money out of, it is, ye know it\rquote s going to pull other parts of us down.  so would you say like we don\rquote 
t take that eighty million, and then we have three hundred and sixty million pounds coming back into the country ye know you\rquote ve got a deficit there that, er, two hundred and eighty million? yeah, it\rquote s, it\rquote 
s a lot of money to throw away.  er, so yeah, we\rquote ve got, we\rquote ve got to give and take, like anybody in business, I mean it\rquote s, our country\rquote s just one big business fighting against other countries.  we, we\rquote 
re all in it together, and I think farming, farming community, again this is, yes I heard on the wireless yesterday, day before?  it\rquote 
s only the last day or two, there on about, trying to talk about subsidy, there on about subsidising the ye know, beet crops, what\rquote s the point of us subsidising beet crops when sugar we can get it from abroad for next to nothing, yet he\rquote 
s being paid says if I\rquote m paid I\rquote ll do it
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 There\rquote s a set rate for it isn\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yeah, and it all goes back to the last world war, 
\par 
\par Yes
\par 
\par the second world war which means we had to, we don\rquote t want to be caught short of food in this country, but the world climate\rquote s changed.  farmers are very}{\f0\insrsid5317725 ,}{\f0\insrsid11892178  very good, they\rquote 
re very efficient, they produce, whatever obstacles you put in their way, they produce, and they\rquote ll keep on producing, ye know, they\rquote ve always fought it.  and erm, ye, I\rquote m gabbling on again I\rquote 
ve lost myself.  But, subsidies, we don\rquote t need the farming basically, as we did need it, it isn\rquote t essential to the country anymore, it\rquote s like, when you think about the coal industry was essential, then we didn\rquote 
t need it we imported coal from Poland cheaper than we can produce it ourselves so the coal mining industry suffered.  is the farming community worried about, did they worry about the coal mining community?  They just found it a nuisance if electric wa
s cut off or something, ye know its, we\rquote re all in our own little circles, see I go stiff if somebody said there\rquote s no petrol any more, er,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 What about the argument though, well this isn\rquote t really to do with either you or foot and mouth but I just wondered wh
at you feel about the argument that the farmers are looking after the countryside.  I mean is, is that important, should that be an objective, how do you feel about it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Yes, they do an excellent job of looking after the countryside and it would be very, one thing you couldn\rquote 
t, how would it, to look after the countryside as it is, and to pay a decent wage,  this is one thing about big business, the argument was farmers work for so little, people would, I\rquote ve always said that they\rquote ve, for the investment they
\rquote re getting poor return, now you put big business in, they\rquote re much better returns so how are they gonna cut corners and make it pay and to look after the countryside?  farmers do it for free basically we know there\rquote 
s subsidies here and there but basically, just a perk. but they\rquote re looking after the countryside and they have done for years and think that, as people like to think of it and they do a grand job.  ye can\rquote t take it away from them but they
\rquote re doing it for very little money, they\rquote re doing it for a pittance.  er, yeah, I can\rquote t see the countryside going to a wilderness, I can\rquote t see that happening
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 You sound quite optimistic about the future
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Optimistic 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par er, I think the future\rquote s great, well I think farming\rquote s going to change
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 I was thinking from your personal point of view because, your work\rquote s picked up again and ...... from the point of view of Penrith the income\rquote s coming in and ......sorry go on
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 No no, right I\rquote m just butting in on you which I shouldn\rquote t do.  erm, yeah, but my business has always been busy, I\rquote 
m trying to cut down, it sounds Irish.  I became a workaholic at one time, I went through this phase where I\rquote d go to bed for ten minutes in a night.  I had absolutely got it bad, and I tried to, and I tried looking (inaudible)I don\rquote 
e know what it was.  I just had this work work work, thing and I was working night and day quite literally, I had er I had several milk rounds going.  Which I could all cover myself  apart from the (}{\f0\insrsid5317725 inaudible}{\f0\insrsid11892178 
), I had a garage and er, other bits of businesses, I\rquote 
d just become, within myself too much.  I think this is a problem, one of the problems, with my wife,  I was not at home I was always working, so she went for a drink, er and friends, the wrong sort of friends, drinking friends which wasn\rquote 
t the right thing.  er, so I\rquote m trying to cut back. My work load, I work a  seventy, eighty hour week at the moment. erm, I think it\rquote s great, I love working, I enjoy, I honestly enjoy every day and I see, I don\rquote t see any depression ro
und the area. , I think the farmer that\rquote s going to  be hit it\rquote s maybe for his own benefit, anybody that\rquote s, that\rquote s losing out well if your business isn\rquote t paying get out, do something else, don\rquote 
t sit and cry about it.  erm, what can I say? You notice I said I had several milk rounds, I made a lot of money out of those, I don\rquote t mind admitting it, but that the end of the, the end of the tunnel, milk rounds are worth nothing now, from what I
\rquote ve heard.  er, milk rounds have gone down the swanney, it\rquote s people, people they\rquote re very loyal are a lot of people, but as soon as that milk man\rquote ll change there\rquote 
s always so many people you lose because they were loyal to that milkman and then it\rquote s an excuse not to want milk off the milkman anymore.  I\rquote ll buy it at the supermarket when I\rquote 
m in there, the supermarkets claimed that market.  and its a dying industry of course but I got out before it dipped erm, First business I built up was a super business er just selling bread and cakes and what have you off a van, had  no custom,
  customers built up going round and I could see what, I was working myself silly er, terrific money in this business but I could see things that, supermarkets were creeping in prices, there was no competition in prices.  and suddenly I could feel it happ
ening so I nipped out of it and into other things ye know.  its just if you look ahead, you shouldn\rquote t cry if things go wrong, I\rquote ve done things and lost money, \lquote cos I got uneasy,  and so what ye know.  I mean it\rquote 
s only money you only need so much to spend, what do you do with the rest of it? this what amuses me with some of the farmers ye know, they like to die and say in paper I left quarter of a million or so and you think well you don\rquote 
t see that.  why not use what you\rquote ve got why not enjoy what you\rquote ve got, and here\rquote s me pennyless ............er...yeah....I don\rquote t know what else I can say really
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 It\rquote s been very interesting
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Mmm, I tell you what it must have felt like as if I was , we were talking you said, you mentioned Lockerbie I got mixed up there, I\rquote ve seen a lot of horrible things
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 You said that, I just wondered if that was why
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 Again, coming back to police training, in those days you used to have to go and see post mortems. I was 19 years old, I\rquote ve seen bodies being cut up and that and it was just part of
 it and you learned to show respect and also have a lighthearted view of it.  I won\rquote t go into them stories, \lquote cos they\rquote re just, they\rquote 
ll just make you laugh in a horrid way, but also as a kid I found them very soft hearted.  I got an air rifle, mentioning no names, \lquote cos I felt I\rquote 
ve never killed an animal since, er, just for sake of killing them, for a purpose yeah.  But I got an air rifle at twelve year old or so and   so I went out and killed a couple of birds, little just little birds and the second one I k
illed it absolutely made me feel so rotten.  I couldn\rquote t believe, it fluttered about on the ground and I eventually killed it out I thought what am I doing this for, I just honestly can\rquote 
t see the point of killing nature just for the sake of saying I can do it. And I can\rquote t, I can\rquote t see the logic of people who go out to kill for sport, for so called sport, killing wild animals. Fine I can accept killing pheasants \lquote 
cos they were bred to be shot, wouldn\rquote t be alive if they hadn\rquote t ye know, they\rquote ve been bred for a purpose so I\rquote ll accept that (turn over tape), but I think they\rquote 
ve to be killed for a reason yeah. , er, and I think a little bit more respect really should be given to animals in life and nature, er, I was undecided such as about hunting, er we have a fox 
comes round here of in  mornings, could get up just three quarters of an hour after sunrise you\rquote ll catch it, comes out of tip, it\rquote s a, it\rquote 
s a male fox, an I, I suppose with trail hounds, we used to have trail hounds as a kid ye know, er but so you, so there\rquote 
s that little bit of a link to hunting.   But I never went to a hunt until a few years ago about four years ago and I went with a guy  in Borrowdale, had a terrific day out, I wanted to see
\par At this point the builder began using a pneumatic drill and it was impossible to hear each other. The interview ended.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid11892178 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid11892178 
\par }}