{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 footer;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 
line number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1797190\rsid3020949\rsid3162256\rsid8412223\rsid10110092\rsid14971881}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr12\min17}{\version6}
{\edmins5}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords6761}{\nofchars38541}{\nofcharsws45212}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\pgnstart0\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2551\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot14971881 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\pgnrestart\pgnstarts0\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid10110092 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid14971881 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par }{\f0\fs20\insrsid10110092 Interview ID:  PM43
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs16\insrsid10110092 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid8412223 24}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs16\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid10110092 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 6}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}06/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid10110092 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Date of birth: 1961
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Occupation: Group 2}{\cs20\f0\super\insrsid10110092 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\f0\fs20\super\insrsid10110092 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid10110092  }{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Group 1 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10110092 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}}}{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\i\f0\insrsid10110092 I drove into the drivewa
y of the caravan site and onto a gravel space, overlooking a large lake with reeds and small bushes by its shore. A model of a heron caught my eye.  To the left of me were caravans and empty pitches, to the right a JCB digger was in action: "we want to sm
o
oth out and expand the car park."   Just behind this machine was a two story brick building and the driver pointed to a window on the first floor, "the gaffer's in there."  I walked into a reception area and up a flight of stairs where I was ushered into 
the site's office, "I know it's very primitive in here, bare floor and thin plaster but with five of us now in a caravan we find this block quite spacious \{laughs\}
."  I was offered coffee and one of the two office chairs.  M sat to the side of her PC which whirred in the background and I sat facing her with the tape recorder placed on her desk}{\b0\f0\insrsid10110092 .  }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid10110092 
Two large windows looked over the wide expanse of lake. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Can you tell me a bit about yourself?

\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par Well we moved here from Penrith about 2 years ago.  We have a shop in Penrith, a tropical fish shop that we still keep going, but this opportunity came up to buy up here in Longtown and start up our own business running the caravan site. So anyway, we dec
ided to make the move and we are now living on site in a caravan.  It hasn\rquote t been easy for us though, we\rquote ve had our troubles but at the moment we\rquote re just keeping going, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So is it working for you in general?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Well the caravans alone wouldn\rquote t bring 
in enough to sort of justify the whole site so we had co}{\f0\insrsid1797190 a}{\f0\insrsid10110092 
rse fishing as well, and that really would decide the entry.  We knew the previous owner here, but he died, I think it would be about 2 years ago.  So basically there was nobody here for sort of 2 ye
ar, so we knew we would have a lot of work to do when we came, and we also knew it was going to cost a lot of money.  But at the end of the day we sort of walked around and it\rquote 
s a nice place to be.  So you see yourself in sort of 10 years time thinking would I rather be sort of still slogging away in the shop or living somewhere here, so we had decided to go ahead with it anyway.  As it turned out, what we didn\rquote 
t know at the time was that there was somebody else from the North East interested in buying as well.  I\rquote 
m not sure exactly what had gone on before hand, but he had dropped out so we were given the opportunity, which we then took.  We moved in in the April, we sort of took over in the April.  Yes, well it was 2 years come April.  Shortly after we move
d in, it was unbelievable\'85 just my first reaction was just that this is somebody winding me up\'85 there was, just at the bottom of the office block here, there was a petrol can full of petrol with a note telling us to get off the site.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 You\rquote re joking?}{\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par  
That was my  [EMPHASIS]  first reaction to be honest with you, that this was just somebody trying to winding me up, you know.  So anyway I called my husband first actually, and he said oh well we better call the police.  So they had come round and taken w
hat have you, you know, thinking\'85}{\b\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par Was there actually a written note? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092  Yeh, a hand written note telling us to get off before they sort of burn the place down kind a thing, you know.  You don\rquote t know how to react to something like that so we sort of just l
eft it.  A few weeks later, in fact it would have been about a week later, we were walking around and there\rquote 
s oil cans in the lakes, so I mean this causes a danger for the fish rather than to us, you know.  Fortunately, weather wise, it was quite windy so I mean it had all moved to the side , and it was just on the surface so it wasn\rquote 
t so bad, so again we called the police.   The next thing is there\rquote s hand written posters being delivered to doors in Longtown, saying we\rquote re running a child pornography ring and we\rquote 
re paedophiles and all sorts.  So of course the police are back round again saying do you know anything about this, sort of going round asking people.   This chap in the cottage up there had actually seen a car driving past and these things being thro
wn out.  We\rquote re getting towards June ,July time by now, a car had driven along there and just thrown loads of these things out the car window, and this chap had come out, he got part of the registration but still didn\rquote 
t know sort of what was going on.  From
 our point [EMPHASIS]   of view, and I have to say, at that time I had still had never regretted taken over, and I mean they had sent rat poison through the post to my son, there was a dog barking in the middle of the night, and you go out and are not sur
e whether there is somebody there or not, or what ever you know.  But as I said, at that time it didn\rquote t mean anything to me, I still didn\rquote 
t regret that we had taken it, even though we had a lot [EMPHASIS]     of work to do and having all this hassle at the same time.   But of course, these things being posted round the town and sort of thrown around here, anybody coming in\'85
 I mean from what I can gather from the people that were here before, in sort of summer holidays and what have you, that little pond there was absolutely jam packed full up with kids coming just for a bit of fishing.  We never had any at all, and you
\rquote ve got to say to yourself, although we know [EMPHASIS]  it\rquote s rubbish, and the people that know us [EMPHASIS]  know it\rquote s rubbish, the people in Longtown don\rquote 
t know anything about us, we had sort of more or less just come, we didn\rquote t know anybody.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So how was this resolved?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It was actually this chap over in the North East that had been interested in buying it.  He\rquote s up in court, it was [EMPHASIS]  was supposed to be October and it\rquote 
s now June.  Charged with possession of explosives and harassment and all sorts.  So I mean we had all that going on in the first season, and as I say, people coming in don\rquote t know anything about us so there\rquote s always going
 to be somebody saying\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 While all that was going on, did you have bookings?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 There was the bookings that had been sorta made before we [EMPHASIS]    came, but there was people on site.  I mean we\rquote ve actually managed to increase the number of people that a
re here all the time on site, but I think at the time there was 5 on site from a disabled anglers group.  There was 5 wee caravans here all the time, so fortunately for us, they [EMPHASIS]   were still coming.  We did get a few sort of people just driving
 
on just on the off chance for the night and what have you.  So we were trying to keep things going that way, but at the same time we were concerned with sorta, to be honest with you, more with what the people of Longtown were thinking. You go into the tow
n and you can see [EMPHASIS]     people\'85cos they know who you are\'85  they\rquote 
re always interested in when ever new people turn up.  Even now I can sorta see some people looking and sorta thinking well is there something in it or is there not.  So I mean it was 
 upsetting, but not to the point where I regretted making the decision, you know .
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
 How long had you had the shop in Penrith?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par We\rquote ve had the shop in Penrith about 10 years.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 You\rquote 
re still keeping that going?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par Yeh, yeh, my husband does that and I did it.  As it turns out it\rquote s fortunate, because in that first year when that [EMPHASIS]   happened, we\rquote ve at least got some sort of income from the shop.   
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Were you living in Penrith?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par We were [living in Penrith].  We had decided at that point when all this sorta was still going on, and we didn\rquote t know who it was\'85because, just because of the size of the site\'85
 somebody, we sort of decided, somebody needed to be here all the time, and sort of not wanting to split the family up with some of us in Penrith and some of us here, we said well we\rquote ll sell the house in Penrith, we\rquote 
ll live in a caravan here at the moment and sorta just put in for planning permission and what have you, and just build a house here and then we\rquote ll be\'85
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092  That is to actually build a house on the site?   
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Yeh, just sort of a little bit up the road there, is sorta what we were 
\par 
\par intending doing.   
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par And before Penrith\'85 where are you from?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par 
\par I\rquote m originally from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, I\rquote ve been here about 21 years, well I\rquote ve 
\par 
\par been in Penrith about 20 years.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 And your husband?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10110092 He\rquote s originally from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}St Helens{\*\xmlclose}.  And he\rquote ll have been in Penrith 
\par 
\par probably about 25 years [PAUSE]    I mean all my kids were born 
\par 
\par here.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par So your background is quite urban?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par It is yeh,  yeh
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par So you like the countryside?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I mean I liked Penrith don\rquote t get me wrong it\rquote s a nice little town and what have you, but there\rquote s no comparison really, when I sort of get up in the morning, even sort of in the winter [EMPHA
SIS]   when I get up in the morning and sort of have a look around, I think this was the place to be, this is where I can see myself in 10 years time.}{\b\f0\insrsid10110092        
\par 
\par So you had this terrible beginning. }{\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par To be honest as a first year it couldn\rquote t have been worse.  As you say, we\rquote re trying to build up a business, we\rquote re trying to do all the work, and it\rquote s needs money coming in. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 It\rquote s bigger than what I thought. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Its 50 acres altogether. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And you\rquote ve got caravans   
\par 
\par   }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Yes, there\rquote s 24 touring pitches and 4 static caravans.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And then you have course fishing as well.}{\f0\insrsid10110092   }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Is that licensed?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It\rquote s on lease, 2 of the waters are on lease, and one is on sea membership, and we sort of have a bit income there but it goes quiet through the winter.    
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Wh
at was your first memory of the foot and mouth epidemic?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Panic [EMPHASIS]     to be honest, for them across the way. Mainly because we couldn\rquote t have asked for nicer neighbours when we first came here.  It was something that they didn\rquote t have to do but they
 came over, they made a point of letting us know that they didn\rquote t believe any of it and what have you, I mean I think he\rquote s about 82 or something, that ole fella, and he\rquote 
s a similar age.  So when we first sorta heard about it, and when it started it was being related to Longtown auction mart.  As I say, the first thought then was I hope nothing happens across the way, just because they had been so nice.  I mean I don
\rquote t know that much about farming anyway , and certainly at that point I didn\rquote t whether it was something that could be just transferred, I certainly [EMPHASIS]  didn\rquote 
t know it could be carried on the wind and things like that.  So yes I mean, our first thought was\'85because it started quite early in the year anyway\'85 was that we would close here [PAUSE]    in order to protect them if you like, so that we didn
\rquote t have fishermen coming from all over the place and sort of going round.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So you closed \'85that must be a hard decision.   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It was in as much as when we had a bad season before really we needed to be getting as much as we possibly could last [EMPHASIS] season.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 Had you got bookings?
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par  We didn\rquote t have bookings for the caravans, we had fishing basically because fishing you can go out in any weather and at any time, you know.   And we sort of
 took the decision then, rather than having people coming from all over and with the best will in the world [EMPHASIS]    they do have to go up by the fields, I mean we\rquote re surrounded by fields on 3 sides and that\rquote 
s where they want to go to fish.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So what did that mean for your livelihood?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 We still had the shop in Penrith, which is basically what kept us going at that time and is still keeping us going now.    So I mean our decision was as long as the shop in Penrith wasn\rquote t affected we could ride this out f
or a little while.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par Has the shop in Penrith been affected?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It has yeh, I think because it\rquote s in the town, I mean some of the business comes from villages and things round about, but it\rquote s mostly from the people in the farming areas.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So what happened?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 We closed from March, and as it turned out.     I think he [neighbour] had bought 7 sheep from Longtown at that time anyway, so he got it anyway and his [EMPHASIS]     animals were culled.  The C nursery\'85
 which is the one on this side\'85 they were culled as well.   S  is actually just a bit further over the back, but the MOD land, which is what borders ours; they let that out for grazing as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So what was it like?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 You just  felt as if it was totally out of control.  Nobody seemed to be doing anything.  As I said, I don\rquote t know anything about farming, or I didn\rquote 
t know at that time how these things were sort of carried and things like that.  But I do know that when I drove into Longtown, I sorta looked at the auction mart and thought nothing\rquote s happening there and there\rquote 
s no sign of anybody been in, there was still at that time vehicles going in and out.   Driving past S there was no sign     that they were infected or anything else, and you just sorta thought well, how can this possibly not  spread when nobody kn
ows [EMPHASIS]    where it is.  Nobody seems to be doing [EMPHASIS]     anything about it, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And what was the feeling in the town \'85. had you made some friends?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Only from sort off going into the bank and going to the shops and things like that, an
d at that point I went into the tourist information office just to find out about the meetings and things like that. Generally    I would have said the mood in the town was just  that people just didn\rquote t know.       I don\rquote 
t think that people expected it to take a hold the way it did, and it was just a case of dreading [EMPHASIS]    seeing anybody in-case they had been the next one.  I mean I know I can specifically remember one day going into the bank, and the woman behind
\'85. although she works in the bank, they have a little small holding\'85and she\rquote s totally [EMPHASIS]         in tears, she\rquote s totally [emphasis] distraught.   You can\rquote 
t [EMPHASIS]    say that you understand what their going through cos I mean I don\rquote t have\'85.well I have a dog\'85I don\rquote t have animals that are worked all the time, where you\rquote 
ve brought them up from being very tiny and what have you, and that\rquote s your livelihood, just to see it all gone in one day, it must be absolutely awful.  She was just totally distraught,  and you think well, still nobo
dy seems to be doing anything, and you\rquote ve got all these people here totally devastated, and still nobody seems to know what the plan is.  I mean I was sorta going along to the meeting and they\rquote re telling you on one hand that they\rquote 
re not going to do somethi
ng, and telling you on the other hand that yes they are and the time when all the fires and everything were going on, there was a front page picture in the independent, with the fires going on sort of just over there and fires going on in F, and fires goi
ng on in S and fires going on just over the back there, you know. 
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 You were actually surrounded by those pyres.  }{\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par Yes, on all sides.  They worried [EMPHASIS]   me from the point of view\'85as I say when we were at the meeting these kind of things were brought up, and you\rquote re being told, no no, there\rquote 
s no harm, they wont cause any harm to health or anything else.  Then somebody else\'85 I can\rquote t remember exactly who it was\'85 but somebody else stood up and had all these sheep and things, and said it causes this, It causes that.  }{
\b\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par This was at a public meeting? }{\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par Yeh, and I\rquote m there thinking well, if it causes all this why are they not even recognising or sort of giving us some [EMPHASIS]    kinda idea that we don\rquote t really know     whether it\rquote s going to cause us an
y sorta harm or not  you know.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So presumably, there were times when you were just surrounded by smoke?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 The smell as much as any thing it was an absolutely [EMPHASIS]    choking stench, it was awful [EMPHASIS].   And that in turn, you sorta had to say to yourself\'85
 cos I mean it was bad enough us having to see it and smell it and everything\'85 but for those people on the farms you\rquote re thinking how could you just stand there and do [EMPHASIS]     that.  And as I said the whole mood [PAUSE]    in this area I
 think [PAUSE]    it was just stunned disbelief, they just [PAUSE]       couldn\rquote 
t believe it was happening on such a scale so quickly.  From the meeting point of view, certainly.    I came away with the sort of impression that even if they did know they weren\rquote 
t telling us anything, there was something going on, some kinda hidden agenda in the background as regards sorta the bigger pyre site that was suppose to be out over the other end of the town.  Nobody knew anything about that until some of the resident
s nearby saw these things coming in, you know, saw the wagons coming in, and the army there and everything, and someone said what\rquote s going on, what\rquote 
s all this for.  To my mind it would have been much much  better if they had actually said this is what we need to do, this is why we need to do it, and this is where we\rquote re going to do it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 This was the end of March, was it when }{\b\f0\insrsid14971881 the army }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 came up and organised the Great Orton Site near Longtown?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092  Yes. My impression still [EMPHASIS]  was that people didn\rquote t know what was going on.  I certainly went to the meetings and I certainly came away thinking they\rquote re still not telling us anything.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par How frequent were the meeting}{\b\f0\insrsid14971881 s}{\b\f0\insrsid10110092  ?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I went to about 4.  I would think my first 2 were probably about a week apart.  Because on the first one when all these questions were raised, they had sorta said look, we don\rquote t know about this but we\rquote 
ll go away and find out and we\rquote ll come back, but by the next one was coming up\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Who was actually chairing these meetings?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I do [LONG PAUSE],  he\rquote s from Carlisle County Council.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So local government.   But I suppose those in the audience were from the farming area?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 This was just sorta the people from Longtown, as far as I knew it was just the people of Longtown.  And to be honest, I think with the exception of farmers, most of them like myself just came to live here and we\rquote 
re concerned  about what was going on, you know, and just wanted a bit of reassurance and a bit of information over what we could expect to be happening next, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And what about your children, were they here at that time?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 They were here, they actually still go to school in Penrith.  There\rquote s a couple of reasons for that, first of
 all because either myself or my husband have to go through to Penrith everyday anyway for the shop, and secondly, going back to all the problems that we had before, as it turned out there were people in Longtown helping to distribute these leaflets and t
hings, and I\rquote m thinking well I\rquote 
m not going to send them to school in Longtown knowing that these people are still there.  To my mind I would have been setting them up to be bullied.  My oldest daughter is actually in GCSEs in Grammar in Penrith anyway, so s
he had to keep going there.  But I mean the decision was taken to keep them going to school in Penrith, save them going back and forward.  They were\'85 I don\rquote t know if anybody actually came right out and said\'85
. Longtown at that time, as soon as you mentioned
 Longtown, you just actually heard the intake of breath and then just nothing.  I know when people were sorta still phoning up asking for brochures and things, and because in most of the magazines it just says Carlisle, when they\rquote 
re asking for brochures and saying exactly where are you, as soon as you mentioned Longtown you might as well of said oh ok don\rquote t bother now, you know\'85 they just didn\rquote t want to know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So for your children, was there a sense of friends not turning up at school?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 There was because the grammar which is the one my older daughter's at, it has quite a wide patch so it does take from all the way round.  And there was a few from Heskit that had come down with it, so they weren\rquote 
t at school.  I don\rquote t think there was ever anybody\'85. As I said this sorta association with the disease in Longtown\'85..I don\rquote t think anybody ever actually sorta came out to them and said you shouldn\rquote 
t be coming here, but I think certainly they felt that because it seemed to be [PAUSE]   .sort of that anybody that came from this area and was going to that area was always taking a risk of taking it with them, as I said, I don\rquote 
t think any of their friends actually\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Did they talk about that to you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Yes.   My daughter particularly, because a lot of her friends are from farming families.  I had been sorta really\'85
she was concerned from the point of view that she was coming up to exams and things cos she wanted to be at school, but she was also concerned about putting her friends at risk\'85as it turned out, I t
hink it was about half a dozen of them ended up where they lost their animals anyway, and I don\rquote t know even to this day if she doesn\rquote 
t think, I should have stayed away, or it might have been my fault or something like that.  I think because people didn\rquote t know enough about it, that\rquote 
s the kinda thing that was being [EMPHASIS]    thought at the time you know, it was just a case of oh if I do this am I putting somebody else at risk.  As I said, either my husband or myself are going into Penrith every day, shoul
d we have been doing that, should we have made arrangements just to staying in Penrith rather than coming back out here.    }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 
\par What about your son, you have a son as well?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par 2 sons.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 You have 2 sons.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Yes one is 14 and one 12.  The younger one tended to be upset I think more so of the point of view of the death.  It\rquote s very difficult when you\rquote 
re sorta surrounded by it, when you see it in newspapers and things, you can look at it and put it away, whereas when you\rquote re surrounded by it, you see the smoke, you see the flames and everything so you can\rquote 
t help but think about it, and know whats going on.  So I think from that point of view\'85.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Was it a topic that was talked about?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It was all anybody spoke about as far as I know; you couldn\rquote t have a conversation without it coming up somehow.  Generally [EMPHASIS]     because it was a case of somebody else that you knew, had lost their animals or\'85
I mean we have a friend of my husband\rquote s who comes out here from Aspatria, but I mean during that time he just couldn\rquote t come out here at all, because his daughter in law has got a farm down there, so he didn\rquote 
t come down at all.  Every time he phoned you were expecting him to say they\rquote ve lost their animals, and I think that even from the kids point of view, every day they went into school it was somebody else had sorta heard\'85or somebody else wasn
\rquote t at school because [EMPHASIS]    their farm had come down with it and they didn\rquote t want to take anybody else down and things like that.  You couldn\rquote t have a conversation without it coming up one way or another.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Did you notice a change in the children?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par I noticed the change in as much as [PAUSE]   they seemed to think much moir\'e9 about it than I had thought [EMPHASIS]    they would.   Again probably from the point of view of all those animals going, you know, because I think it\rquote 
s something they just hadn\rquote t thought of before.  I mean it\rquote s like everybody, you drive along and you take it for granted there\rquote s sheep in the field, there\rquote s cows in the field and even they    would notice, and it\rquote s 
strange, we sort of  walk around here in the morning and it was absolutely silent, you just wouldn\rquote t expect it, cos although your not registering that that is what the sound is, you know in the back of the mind that it\rquote 
s just sheep in the field over there, or you hear it or something and it was just totally silent round here.  As I said, I wouldn\rquote 
t have expected my kids to notice that, but they did.  And again it was a case of once [the silence registered and you say to yourself, why is it so quiet and that you have to think again  about why it is so quiet and you know it\rquote s because they
\rquote ve all gone, you know, so that sort of takes you back to the pyres again and so on and its all linked for such along time you know\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So do you think the epidemic affected you, your children and your husband?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Certainly my husband would say that [PAUSE],    it\rquote s difficult I think.    We certainly have had more colds, wheezing coughs and things like that.  I\rquote m more inclined to say well, it\rquote s probably because we\rquote 
ve just spent winter in a caravan, which although it\rquote s got heating and things like that, it isn\rquote t ideal.  But certainly my husband thinks there\rquote s more to it than that.  If the smoke and everything was going to cause something, there
\rquote s no way being in this area there\rquote s no way we could have avoided it, and certainly he thinks it.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And the smell. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I mean the smell was just totally unreal at times, and as I said, we were bad enough being here, I can\rquote t imagine what it must have been like for people actually on those farms.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So was that difficult around food and things, or did you just shut it all out?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par It was [EMPHASIS] just a case of keeping everything closed; we couldn\rquote t walk round here on some days. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 That must have been difficult.  So you closed your business for March.  Then what happened?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
We sort of came to the conclusion that everybody sort of surrounding us had already lost their animals anyway it was certainly not necessary for us to stay closed, so we opened again, we put it in the fishing magazines and things.  We 
got local anglers, and towards the end of the season I sort of went down\'85 well I mean, the season properly starts probably around the end of and February and runs till the end of September, October to January it\rquote 
s sorta just real die hard.  We opened again, I think middle of April, we got local anglers and what have you.  The problem by then [emphasis]      was spreading to different parts of the country at that time, so you then get people that \'85
where although we    were clear, and there was still a bit of
 an association I think, from the caravan site more than the fishing probably, but although we sorta were considered as being clear here, because the animals had all gone from here, the sort of places they were coming fishing from sorta West Cumbria and w
hat have you, they were sorta still in the progress of it, and getting more cases everyday, so although the number of cases were tailing off here obviously in other parts of the country it wasn\rquote 
t.  And so they were logged in to sort of travel from an area that was then infected to come back over here, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And your touring caravans?
\par 
\par }\pard \s15\qj \fi-720\li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
          Yes.  The touring caravans were just absolutely non existent.  As I said, at that time, or by that time had probably 7 or 8 caravans that were here all the time,
 there was no sort of where they drop in just on the off chance for the night, there was no phoning up to book pitches or anything else.  Even though of the ones that are here all the time, there\rquote s one that actually, they live in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}, they just come h
ere for the fishing and what have you, and they visited because as I said everything here is already clear, but nobody else did. So although we were to all intents and purposes we were open, we might as well not have been because there\rquote 
s just nothing going on here. 
\par }\pard \s15\qj \fi-720\li720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 I\rquote m not asking for figures here but can you count the cost of the estimated difference?
\par }\pard \s15\qj \fi-720\li720\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }\pard \s15\qj \fi-720\li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10110092            It\rquote s been difficult [EMPHASIS]  for us, I mean I\rquote 
ve sort of been in touch with this and thinking what have you, because of the grants and things that are going on, and it\rquote 
s difficult [EMPHASIS] for us from the point of view, it was a new business for us really anyway, we had no sort of previous figures to compare it with, and the figures from the previous year when all the trouble had been going o
n had been a sort of precaution anyway.  I would have said Caravan wise we lost 95% of the business; people just didn\rquote 
t want to know.   To the point where, had it not been for the shop in Penrith managing to keep going, we would have lost this anyway, cos 
we took out a mortgage to buy this anyway in the first place.   I mean having said that, X X at the bank in Longtown has been absolutely wonderful, he\rquote s there whenever you want him and he\rquote s there just to even to talk] about something and he
\rquote ll say well ok if this isn\rquote t working try this or what have you, we\rquote ve had nothing but support [EMPHASIS]  from the Bank, but we wouldn\rquote t have survived if we didn\rquote t have the shop in Penrith.
\par }\pard \s15\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 All this sounds so tough.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 As regards sorta my own personal feelings I\rquote ll be honest with you, I was ok up until probably two weeks ago, which it starts to bite really, because the shop in Penrith at this time of year goes very quiet anyway ] so we
\rquote ve got this still being quiet, and sorta over Christmas I was encouraged because at leas
t people were phoning up and asking for brochures and things like that.  I mean it sounds awful, but when sorta people are saying the number of holidays being booked abroad is going down [EMPHASIS]  I\rquote 
m thinking well, that that only be good for us, people are holidaying at home, and so I was starting to think ok well maybe we\rquote re going to be ok for this season.  I don\rquote 
t know whether  it sorta people are just hanging back a little bit before they book or whether there is still something there, but I mean for about 100 brochures going out, I\rquote 
m taking about 4 bookings.   And that kinda of ratio, you know, it just isn\rquote t worth it for us, you know and for as much as I say well this is where I want to live and everything else, we can\rquote t justify sorta being here if you haven\rquote 
t got a business.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Do you and your husband both have the same outlook or is one\'85?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It causes a bit of stress because [PAUSE]  for us to be here money needs to be spent here still.  It\rquote 
s all things that we knew when we took it on, but we were expecting to have had two good seasons behind us now, you know.   The electric here\'85
 basically this building was put up by whoever came [PAUSE]     and so every time you turn around something else is wrong with it.  The hole in the electric\'85
Norweb would have a heart attack if they came and looked at the holes you know, but I mean we knew that, we knew it was going to have to be done.  So originally in our five year plan this was going to be the year 
when we get the electrics done, so we called them out and what have you\'85now there\rquote s a hole     just behind the building here, so I mean to my mind it isn\rquote 
t that big a job, and they come back so we had asked for a quote to get that done and asked for a quot
e to renew the hook up pitches to the trailing caravans over there.  They came back up with 8000 pounds to upgrade just the pole and another 8000 pounds to upgrade the hook up.  And I\rquote 
m thinking 16000 pounds, were is it going to come from, you know.  And so my husband is of the point of view that we can\rquote 
t keep taking this amount of money out of the shop money, because obviously the shop needs to be stocked and everything else you know, so that cause arguments because I know it needs to be done and it needs 
to be justified as well and you just sort of feel between the devil and the deep blue sea.  If I don\rquote t do the work I\rquote m not going to get the people here and if I don\rquote t get the people here I can\rquote 
t afford to do the work, you know cos you can\rquote t keep putting money out when there\rquote s nothing coming in, you know.  In the last couple of weeks I\rquote 
ve basically just been saying ok we had that the first year then foot and mouth the second year, what\rquote s this year hitting us with , can it get any worse.  And that was the first time since we came [PAUSE] that I haven\rquote 
t had a clear answer and I don\rquote t know whether it\rquote s just because it\rquote s winter or what ever.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 But you\rquote ve been through an awful lot. Is there somebody outside the family that you can talk to?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 There probably would be, I\rquote m not the type of person that would just go to\'85just because of my own family background\'85  I mean my mother had throat cancer last year so, I mean she\rquote s ok now [EMPHASIS]     but you can
\rquote t just keep sorta going and sorta doing all this, you know.  I tend to be the type of person that thinks everybody else has got enough of their own problems they don\rquote t need mine as well.  Up until now, just myself and my husband we\rquote 
re still able to go back and forward, when he\rquote s up here I\rquote m down there and visa versa just now anyway
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 But your own family anyway, they\rquote re a little away are they?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Yes, I mean my mum\rquote s still up in Paisley, my brothers are up there, I have one sister here in Carlisle, but I mean she\rquote s just had a baby in the beginning of January, but I mean you can\rquote 
t keep going to people and say this is happening and that\rquote s happening and things, because there\rquote 
s always [EMPHASIS] something else going, or there always seems to be something else going on.   Which is quite right,  you know, everybody has their own problems.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 But how do you feel in yourself?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 As I said, I\rquote m sort of just getting over a sorta cold or what ever it is, that might have had a bearing on it.  But certainly the last couple of weeks it\rquote s been a struggle \{PAUSE] to sorta keep on the positive an
d say we are going to be all right, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And have you noticed any other affects such as with your sleeping?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par I mean generally speaking I can sleep through anything.  I mean again   the last couple of weeks I\rquote ve sorta just awake through the night a co
uple of times and what have you.  I tend to get up early and go to bed early anyway so, your sort of getting kids off to school and things like that, so your sort of tired through the day.   
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par But it can\rquote t be easy anyway; you\rquote re living in a mobile home and running a business?  }{\f0\insrsid10110092  
\par 
\par And I think this is the kinda thing\'85. because when I\rquote m starting to go that way, I\rquote m sitting thinking, I\rquote ve given up a 6 bedroom old Victorian house in Penrith which was great, and we did  like it there.  There was plenty of space a
nd everything, we had the shop which was going well you know, and I think to myself why did we do this, why did we basically give all that up just to come here and live in a caravan.  Because I mean even the living in a caravan the intention [if you like 
was that\'85
 I mean this time last year we would have had the planning permission and we would have started building, and it would have been done by now.   Sort of being financed partly from the sale of our own [house] and sorta a new mortgage and what have yo
u.  Here, I mean the money from the sale of our own house is gone on the keeping us going ,  so there\rquote s nothing left, you know, and I\rquote m thinking you just can\rquote t [get blood out of a stone, when there\rquote 
s nothing [EMPHASIS]   left there\rquote s nothing [EMPHASIS]             left.  So I\rquote m thinking, if we don\rquote t get a good season here everything that we\rquote 
ve sorta worked for the last 10 or 15 years for have just been for nothing, you know.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So is there any financial help that you can get that\rquote s directly related to the foot and mouth?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 We\rquote ve had\'85 I\rquote 
ll be honest with you, my own personal feeling on that is that it was just a fiasco from start to finish.  We have had the rural property grant, which totalled 8000 pounds, 6000 pounds for marketing and 2000 for computers.  I\rquote 
m angry at the fact that when that was first sorta\'85when that first came about and everything, everybody said they will run out of money get your claim in quick.   So I mean literally within days I had contacted 'Business Link'}{
\cs20\f0\super\insrsid10110092 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid10110092 \chftn }{
\insrsid10110092  }}}{\f0\insrsid10110092 , we had signed it and sent if off, and that\rquote s no problem.  At that time there was actually 15000 pounds available, but 7000 of that was to cover the loan interest, but it couldn\rquote 
t be on loans that you already had, it had to be on loans that you were taking out after that time.    And I\rquote m thinking, maybe I\rquote m just naive here, but I\rquote m not going to go for more borrowing when I\rquote 
m not sure that I can pay what I\rquote ve already got, you know, I mean anyway that\rquote s what happened.  So they're saying they\rquote ll run out of money, get your claim in as
 quick as you can, so of course I took the claim in.  And this 6000 pounds for marketing now would\'85I mean different people have different ideas, you know\'85
I mean, to my mind 6000 would have been better spent on improvements here [EMPHASIS]    than on marketing, but that\rquote s all you could get.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So it\rquote s tied?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It was at time, it was tied to marketing.  The tourist thing, the brown tourist sign , I mean, It\rquote s just all things that just keep getting thrown at you\'85
 I asked for a quote for a brown tourist sign, I mean you possibly saw it\'85 they cost [EMPHASIS]  1000 pounds each, and I\rquote m thinking how can you justify 1000 pounds [EMPHASIS]  for a little bit of a sign, you know.    There\rquote 
s only certain companies that are
 allowed to do them , and as a matter of fact it was Cumbria C Services  who done them for us in the end.   But I mean it was like 3,800 pounds to build a few  signs.   They then moved the goal post by saying, well no, although it was not only for marketi
ng, you can now spend it on whatever you want.  And I\rquote m thinking, I\rquote ve got signs up there, which yes, it\rquote s a good idea, it gets people in off the road if  they're just passing, and it gives people\'85but it\rquote 
s not [EMPHASIS]what I would have spent that money on had I been allowed to go with it in the first place, you know.  And they then said that [PAUSE] the interest\'85the money that was always for   interest really\'85
could be applied to loans that were taken out before.  But of course we hadn\rquote t been allowed any of the interest relief because we didn\rquote t have a new loan.  They're saying, well you can\rquote t have that now, so I\rquote 
m saying, well what you\rquote re telling me is that somebody that just started out a business just [EMPHASIS] as foot and mouth was taking hold, gets 15000 pounds, I said I\rquote m trying to keep a business going here, that\rquote 
s already had a real bad season, and I get 8 and she said, well, there\rquote s nothing I can do about that.  It\rquote s not [EMPHASIS] that I\rquote m not grateful for what we did get, it\rquote s something else that just wasn\rquote 
t organised properly and that\rquote s what you feel.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 It causes resentment}{\f0\insrsid10110092 .  
\par 
\par It does yes definitely [EMPHASIS].      From the point of view\'85 I know it\rquote s no point in getting angry with the people on the phone, their only doing what their suppose to do\'85
 but it just makes you feel that nobody really thought this through properly in the first place.  Exactly the same as when it was all just sparking off here, nobody actually thought through what it meant      and what needs to be done, and that\rquote 
s the feeling you come away with.  They really just don\rquote t give a monkeys.  Just because it doesn\rquote t affect them directly, you just feel that they just don\rquote t care, it\rquote s like they're thinking, oh we\rquote 
ll  throw that at them and see if that keeps them quite for a while.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 So the future\rquote s uncertain?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 Absolutely. And as I say, for the first time since we moved here, it\rquote s uncertain without there being a light at the end of the tunnel.  But for the trouble that we had for the first year\'85
because I knew it had to be somebody that was doing that\'85 and I knew they would get them eventually [EMPHASIS], so you thought well it\rquote s ok, once they\rquote ve got them we\rquote ll move on.   
\par 
\par Last year it was sort of, well all this started you think well somebody has got to do something, and it just never s
eemed to happen.  Although the army came in and took physical control of the logistics and everything, nobody seemed to be controlling what was happening to the people that were being left behind.  So there was nothing then.  And this year as I say, it
\rquote s possible, it\rquote s just because it\rquote s sorta winter and that, I\rquote ve had colds or what ever it is, but It just doesn\rquote t seem [PAUSE]   as if there\rquote s a way out of it at the moment. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 It\rquote s hard to keep going. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It is, it is.  Because I know that we need to have all this lot done and I know I can\rquote t get people here without having all this lot done, but there\rquote 
s no way of getting the work done without having the money, so you just think you\rquote re going round in circles the whole time.   That\rquote s how it feels at the moment.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par It must be a nightmare.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 The majority of the time I\rquote 
m well able to say there are plenty of people much, much worse off than we are.  I know there are.  I mean people that are reliant soley    on this kind of business, who have foot and mouth, must be absolutely devastated.           I don\rquote 
t know how they\rquote ve managed to survive the winter, because we certainly wouldn\rquote t have if we hadn\rquote t had the shop at Penrith.  And I know   there\rquote s a lot of people that must be in a position, saying well what\rquote 
s the point in going on.  I mean at least we\rquote ve got something,    but its just difficult to sort of look on the bright side at the moment.     
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092  You haven\rquote t got friends in a similar situation?   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I haven\rquote t.  Sorta\'85I mean I do have friends, it\rquote s just that they have what you
 would call a normal lifestyle.  They sort of go out to work and get paid at the end of the week.  And this is what we are stuck with, we either make it or we don\rquote t.  And I don\rquote 
t know about anybody else when it comes down to being that kind of decision at the end of the day.  Because what happens here at the end of the day is that, if we decide that we don\rquote 
t want to do this anymore we lose our home and everything else that we\rquote ve worked for.  Certainly the people I know can say well ok I don\rquote t want to do this job anymore I\rquote ll just go and get another job.  And it doesn\rquote 
t mean their job and everything else going along with it, you know.  You can\rquote t afford to take that sort of decision without you really really have to do it, you know.   Cos I don\rquote t know where we would start again, I don\rquote 
t know if we could [EMPHASIS]  start again.  It would be a case of you have to go out and get\'85  and the whole point of running your own business is that your not having] to go out and do a job that you don\rquote t want.  That\rquote s what it\rquote 
s all about at the end of the day.  This is absolutely the ideal place for us; this is what we could see ourselves doing.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 And are your children happy?
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 
\par Yes, I mean they love [EMPHASIS] this place, they don\rquote t particularly like the fishing and they don\rquote t un
derstand quite why somebody would want to put a touring caravan and things like that.  But they like being here,  they like bringing their friends here; they know they have a sort of the freedom. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 It is a beautiful spot isn\rquote t it. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It is yes.  We\rquote ve done [EMPHASIS] a lot, I mean even through everything that was going on last year, we\rquote ve done a lot of work, we got a David Bellamy gold conservation award last year, sorta just for the work that we
\rquote ve done since we came here, and things like that, well this is why you do it, this is what\rquote s making it all worth while and what have you.  But I mean, even things like that, they want sort of 50 pounds\'85I know it doesn\rquote 
t sound a lot\'85but they want 50 pounds a year to have that gold award.  You don\rquote t pay anything if you\rquote ve got\'85well you pay to join the scheme whatever award you get\'85 but you don\rquote t pay anything if you\rquote 
ve got a silver award, but you pay 50 pound if you\rquote ve got a gold award cos they have to pay their assessor out every year.  So then you think, what was the point of getting the gold award then, I may as well as stuck with a silver, it\rquote 
s not going to put somebody off coming, whether I\rquote ve got a silver or a gold, what was the point .  So in the last two weeks, it just seems to be that every way you turn so
mebody wants money for something and you think where is it going to come from, you know.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 That must be overwhelming.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092  It is [PAUSE] and I\rquote m hoping it is just at the moment.  It\rquote s not that 50 quid is going to make much difference in the greater scheme of things, but all these fifties are going to be mounting up and that\rquote 
s what going to be the end of us, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Is there anything you would like to add?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 No there isn\rquote t.  I mean this is just the situation we find ourselves in at the moment, and I\rquote m conscious of the fact that I have to fill in a diary, and I\rquote m hoping [EMPHASIS], \'85
even from my own point of view that as I\rquote m looking back on previous weeks diaries, that it\rquote s going the right way if you see what I mean, because I\rquote ll be able to see myself that t
he moods getting better and the outlook is getting better, sort of things are getting a bit more positive.  I think just at the moment this is where we are at this particular time because of sorta what\rquote s gone on.  But at some point you\rquote 
ve just got to say well lets get up and get on with it.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 You\rquote ve been through so much.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 It feels as if nothing else could possibly go wrong.  But then up to a point I think we thought that last year as well.   Sort of we were through the winter last year an
d there was the delay with the trial and what have you, but we still knew something was going to be done about it.  We would have a good season, and we were making a new start, and then that happened last year.  Then sort of the business, I\rquote 
ll be honest with you, from a business point of view, it took sorta second place, because you were so concentrated     and it was so in your face about what everybody else was going through.  And where there isn\rquote 
t anything this year, it leaves you a bit more time to be reflecting or thinking of what\rquote s going on in yourself and I think that\rquote s part of the battle.  You\rquote 
ve got a bit more time to be [PAUSE] selfish if you like and thinking well what am I doing and why am I doing it.  This time last year it was, I hope you don\rquote t get it, and I hope he doesn\rquote t get it, you know.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 I don\rquote t think it\rquote s selfish though. In fact I think it\rquote s totally\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 I think [PAUSE] it\rquote s}{\i\f0\insrsid10110092  }{\f0\insrsid10110092 possibly a bad time for me personally [EMPHASIS] to be taking stock [PAUSE] just because of everything else that seems to be going on, there doesn\rquote 
t seem to be a much of a way out of it, where a month from now it will probably be sorted.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 I do hope so [long pause].  Is there anything else you would like to say?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10110092 No, no 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid10110092 Well thank you so much for your time
\par }}