{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f138\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f139\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f140\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f142\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f143\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f144\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f145\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f146\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f147\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f150\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f153\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f154\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f157\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid619675\rsid866943\rsid4532536\rsid5930571\rsid6231255\rsid9258592\rsid11031442\rsid11283668\rsid12803145\rsid15074801\rsid15353506\rsid16473286}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}
{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy4\hr16\min20}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy16\hr14\min42}{\version10}{\edmins9}{\nofpages17}{\nofwords3704}{\nofchars21113}{\nofcharsws24768}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl 
{\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120
\dgvspace180\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot6231255 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid866943 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid866943 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid866943 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid866943 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid866943 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid6231255 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid866943 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM18
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs17\insrsid866943 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid15074801 1}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs17\insrsid866943 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid866943 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid866943 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date
}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 3}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 7}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}07/03/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid866943 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Date of birth: 19}{\f0\insrsid15074801 55}{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid866943 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid866943 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid866943  }{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Group 1 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f138\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid866943 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid866943 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid866943 
G works at a secondary school and likes me to visit her there, "oh home's a bit chaotic with my boys and I can always find time at work.  The Head's very supportive of this project."  I arrived during break time and the school was awash wi
th young people and noise. G led me to, "well it's a bit of a stock room really but quiet and it's got comfy chairs [laughs]."  We sat next to each other with our chairs turned so that we could face one another and it was indeed very peaceful.  A small wi
ndow overlooked an expanse of trees.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Can you tell me a bit about yourself?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I am 47.  I have 3 children.  I have been married twice.   Got 3 boys, 19, 17 and }{\f0\insrsid15353506 [one]}{\f0\insrsid866943  from a second marriage who is 6, so I have my hands full.  I have been here at C School for\'85
 this is my second year.  Previously I was in B school as a secretary there, and I was there for thirteen years, and I\rquote ve lived in B for 20 years [PAUSE]  so I know the village people round there quite well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Were you actually born there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I was born in Kendal and the family moved to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}
 when I was 3 and we lived at Stanwix.  I went to school and then I went on to Trinity and then left when I was 15 and started work in a shop and then I sort of progressed from that to an office junior and sort of 
ended up working for the [local newspaper] offices.  And then I got married to a Geordie, went to live in Newcastle for a year and then I missed the Lake District and the countryside very much; I didn\rquote 
t think I would but I did and we moved back over here, because my husband loved the countryside as well, and we moved back here.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 What is your parents\rquote  background, are they Cumbrian?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Mum was born in Barrow and Dad was born in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Shropshire{\*\xmlclose}.  Yes, they were in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose} for a long time.}{\b\f0\insrsid866943     

\par 
\par Do you have brothers and sisters?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I have a brother who lives in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Sunderland{\*\xmlclose} [PAUSE] and one in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Hartlepool{\*\xmlclose} and his wife works }{\f0\insrsid4532536 [}{
\f0\insrsid866943  }{\f0\insrsid4532536 name] }{\f0\insrsid866943 University, so they are sort of in between the two.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Do you have regular contact?}{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par 
\par Oh yes, yes.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So would you describe your family as quite close?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 We are.  Dad died unfortunately about seven years ago.  He was a real character my Dad, he use to have a }{\f0\insrsid16473286 [local radio] }{\f0\insrsid866943 
programme [PAUSE] collecting 78 records.  Mum and Dad moved to B not long after I was divorced, they came to support me and my two boys really, but Dad was only there for two years and then he died.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Your present partner, is he local?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes, he\rquote s from a farm at G.  His brother ended up with the farm.  There\rquote s a long story behind that but my husband now works at the cemetery in C, he\rquote 
s cemetery foreman and I knew of him but it was about four years after I was divorced that we started going out and we\rquote ve now been married seven years.  His brother lost all his animals to foot and mouth.  He\rquote s sold the farm and has bought
 another one so he\rquote s starting up again.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 
Did he sell the farm as a direct consequence of foot and mouth?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid866943 Not really, he was doing it anyway.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So do you think it was a sort of . . . .?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Well [PAUSE]  I don\rquote t know really [LONG PAUSE].  No I think he\rquote d already made his mind up to do that anyway.   He sold the farm as a building site and it was a family farm.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Did it go back generations?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Well it was a rented farm but the family had been on it for a long time and they\rquote d been through hardships.  The peop
le who they were renting from, they were fine, but when the lady died she left it all to the animal refuge [PAUSE]  so they had to buy [EMPHASIS]   the farm back off the animal refuge, and you couldn\rquote 
t afford to buy the whole farm so they only bought half of the farm, therefore there wasn\rquote t enough work for the two brothers.  It was a nightmare.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Was it a mixed farm?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I don\rquote t know.  I think so, yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So it\rquote s been sold for building?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 All the land\rquote s been sold.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And that\rquote s around G?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So he\rquote s moved out to another area has he?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 You are probably too young to remember but do you have any memories at all, of the \rquote  67 foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 
I do because my Dad used to work for the Ministry of Agriculture.   He was a farm wages inspector.  He got chased many a time with a gun off a farmer [CHUCKLES], but at that time he had to carry his wellies, his disinfectant and everything, in the back of
 the car.  So yes we were involved in a way.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So you have memories of that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I do, yes.  When there was first talk of foot and mouth I just thought, oh no not again.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Can you remember your first thoughts about this outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 It was in the North East wasn\rquote t it when they first said [LONG PAUSE].  I was just hoping [EMPHASIS] that it wasn\rquote 
t going to spread, because where I live is a farming community and I knew from past how quickly it could [EMPHASIS]  spread, and obviously the school here where I work is a 
farming school.  A lot of the children live on farms so they would all be affected by it, which they were.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 In the early stages was there a feeling that actually this could become a problem?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Not initially.  We just kept fingers crossed and hoped that it wouldn\rquote t.  We weren\rquote 
t really prepared for what was going to happen.  We had to sort of put things in position fairly quickly when we realised the enormity of it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So contingency plans just had to be made as and when?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So what actually happened, was it that children just suddenly weren\rquote t coming to school?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 We used to get parents phoning up  saying, do we send our children to school or not, is it safe for them to come to school, can they catch it, can it be transmitted from farm to farm by the children.  To which we sort of said, well, we
\rquote re sorry but we don\rquote t know [EMPHASIS], we\rquote re going to have to put the responsibility onto you.  We can say we will support you if you keep your child off, we won\rquote t\'85 you know normally if you keep your child off school for
 a length of time, people get called in and find out what\rquote s happening, but we said to them, you wont be penalised, nothing will happen. We support you because it\rquote 
s your livelihood, and if you need work for your child we will send it home for you or we will get it to you some way.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So this must have caused quite a lot of disruption.  What about the children who were [emphasis] coming, was there a sense that they were worrying about the ones who weren\rquote t?}{\f0\insrsid866943  
\par 
\par Oh yes.  I\rquote m a First Aider and we lots of them distressed and we just had to comfort them and say we\rquote ll do the best we can.  We\rquote 
ve all got to stick together and support each other, and generally just to talk about it.  I think they needed just to get it out of their 
systems how they were feeling.  It was a very emotional time, because there was times when I had to go and get a child out of the classroom and say, you\rquote ve got foot and mouth, you\rquote 
ve got an hour to decide whether you go home with your family or you find so
mewhere else to live and you keep coming to school.   I mean the majority would go home but for the children who were sitting exams, it was very [[EMPHASIS] traumatic, and some of them did decide to live within the village or with friends, so they could c
ontinue with their studies and get through them because we didn\rquote t know how long it was going to last.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So you did have a number of children who were placed with other families?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 We did yes, or with grandparents.  For them [EMPHASIS], knowing that the beasts
 were being slaughtered and not being able to be with Mum and Dad and brothers and sisters, you know.   They coped really [EMPHASIS]  well. I was quite impressed, you know, for such young people to cope like that. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Yes, exam time is a very stressful time anyway.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes, and they did do well, so we were really proud of them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 I\rquote m trying to get a feeling of how you and your colleagues were giving all this extra support and getting on with your daily work load which I have no doubt in a school this size is p
retty phenomenal anyway, what was happening for you and your colleagues throughout all this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 We just rallied together basically.  We got up a list of all the children who were affected.  We had a list of those who had had foot and mouth and a list of those who were\'85
 they had different type of notices put on them and we had lists.  We just tried to help each other and tried to keep on top of it all.  
\par 
\par The day that they said they were going to do the cull, that was just an absolute nightmare [EMPHASIS], and
 in fact, me and my colleagues, we just broke into tears, we just said that means our village is going to be wiped out if this is going to happen; because when we [EMPHASIS]  heard it was going to be everything [EMPHASIS], but on the way home in the car w
e heard that it was just going to be the cattle. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Terrible.
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par It\rquote s just a way of life.  I didn\rquote t realise until they weren\rquote t there\'85 you know, the animals had disappeared, it was horrible [EMPHASIS]\'85 how much I took them for granted, they were just part of my
 daily life.  Taking the dog up the road and the fields are all empty, you just think this is strange, it was like a calm before a storm, you know.    
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Your youngest boy goes to the local school does he?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 
\par So what was happening for him?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Well one of his best friends, he was off school, kept from day one they said right, that\rquote s it, we\rquote re going to bar the doors, we\rquote 
re going to stay on the farm.  In fact I use to drop things off for them on the way home, you know, if they wanted to post anything, I\rquote d pick it up and post it for them.  I don\rquote 
t know how they caught it but they did.  And then I had to explain to my six year old, }{\f0\insrsid619675 [friend}{\f0\insrsid866943 \rquote s}{\f0\insrsid619675 ]}{\f0\insrsid866943  animals have died and when he comes back to school you\rquote 
re going to have to help him.  He just sat there and he said, it\rquote s very sad isn\rquote t it Mummy [CHUCKLES].  I said, it is very sad, yes [PAUSE].   I don\rquote t think they really realise the enormity of it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 At school did they have mats down?
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par Yes.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 
\par  And did they have to wear special footwear?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Not really.  We just had the disinfectant mats at the gates and the cars had to go over the mats at all the entrances.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And in the school at B?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes we had mats down there as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 There was no suggestion at the primary school of closing it at any time?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 There was talk about it, but no they said they were going to keep open.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 What about your older sons, are they still at home?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 My eldest has just moved out; he\rquote s just moved down the road in the village with a friend to see if they can survive.  Yes }{\f0\insrsid12803145 [both]}{\f0\insrsid866943  are both at home.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Where are they in terms of education?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12803145 M}{\f0\insrsid866943 y eldest is nineteen, he\rquote s working in C  at a  supply company.  }{\f0\insrsid12803145 [Next one] }{\f0\insrsid866943 is here, he is doing his A levels, he\rquote s in the lower sixth form.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So did it affect them in quite different ways?  Did they talk about it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Not so much }{\f0\insrsid12803145 [oldest]}{\f0\insrsid866943 , }{\f0\insrsid12803145  [next one]}{\f0\insrsid866943  who\rquote s here, he\rquote 
s in Young Farmers and his best friend lives on a farm, so I mean he was more upset about it I would say.  He found it hard but you just have to get on with it.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And what about your partner?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 He was very upset obviously.  He was upset anyway that his brother was going to sell the farm but to have this as well.  Every time we heard of any of our friends getting the disease, the  farm getting the disease, we would ju
st send them a card and say we\rquote re thinking about you, if you need anything just ring us.  It brought a lot of people closer together I think.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Did it affect your social life then?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes. Well we couldn\rquote t go out anyway, we just stayed at home but we would phone them a lot  [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Do you think that helped?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.  Everybody had to cope with it in their own way.  There was one girl I use to ring and she just use to cry and cry and cry and they didn\rquote t get it in the end. Her husband hung onions [EMPHASIS], w
hich is an old wives tale, around the farm.  He was on front of the news with his onions, trying to protect his farm.  But it did, he never caught it, but his sheep had to be culled because of the disease further down the road [PAUSE].  Others would say, 
oh we\rquote ll just get on with it, we\rquote ve just got to do what we can, if we get it, we get it.  I think it was harder for those who didn\rquote t get it [PAUSE], I think you\rquote 
ll find, the waiting, not knowing.  Once you caught it, that was it and they had to deal with it, but the ones who just had to wait\'85 there\rquote s a farm right in the middle of the village that caught it and nobody else did round about and we couldn
\rquote t understand why.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 There are a lot of lay theories about how it spreads; do you have a particular explanation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I think the burning of the carcasses.  I think it was wind born.
\par You could tell by the way the wind was blowing and when you had these pyres, it just seemed to be carried by that.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Were you aware of those pyres where you live?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes, and round here.  The smell was absolutely [EMPHASIS]   horrendous.  Some days you couldn\rquote t deal with it. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And a lot of these farming children had to deal with that as well.
\par 
\par Do you have any future concerns, particularly about health in terms of say water pollution?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 It\rquote s crossed my mind but not\'85 I hope [EMPHASIS] it\rquote s been dealt with properly [LAUGHTER]  because we\rquote re not far from Great Orton.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 What do you think of that disposal site?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I\rquote ve never been near.  I always to come through Great Orton on my way to school but I don\rquote 
t go that way anymore.  It was just awful to see the pictures on the television and in the paper, all these bodies being put in, and you\rquote 
d be coming to school and there would be these wagons [EMPHASIS]  coming past and you could smell the death [EMPHASIS & PAUSE], you could smell it, it was horrible [EMPHASIS].  I just hope it doesn\rquote t come back that\rquote s all.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 In terms of your workload increasing, it must have been stressful?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Oh it was very [EMPHASIS]   stressful.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 
\par So where did you find release.  I know you say you came together with your colleagues but you were still all within it, so was there a sense that you could go somewhere else?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Well, because it was happening all around you, you couldn\rquote t really.  Everywhere you turned, hmm just talking to others.  We
 were supporting others, and because I was thinking of the children here it helped me deal with it.  Rather than thinking of myself, I was thinking of the children and what they [EMPHASIS]   must be going through because I [EMPHASIS]   don\rquote 
t live on a farm.  For them [EMPHASIS]   it must have been awful.  I mean there\rquote s one girl came back after they\rquote d been cleansed and everything and she just burst into tears one day and she said the cat had gone missing and they\rquote 
d lost all there other animals and she was really upset because the cat had gone missing.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 In your day-to-day job description, obviously you have a lot of contact with children and you\rquote ve got to have a rapport I suppose with this age group, but I was wondering - because you are easy to talk to -   i
f you needed to have any sort of formal training in terms of communication, especially for situations such as this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 No.  I suppose the various jobs I\rquote ve done; I\rquote ve always sort of done reception work and talked to people.  When I was in the Cumberland News
, I was in the advertising department and in the reception there and you had all sorts of walks of life coming in there.  You had farmers who wanted to advertise or you had people who come who wanted to sell houses.  You just learned how to deal with ever
ybody as they were.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Was there any point when you felt you were in this too deeply and maybe thought, \'93 I don\rquote t quite know what these children need, I feel they need more than just me talking with them?\'94
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Not really [PAUSE].  They seemed too [PAUSE]  feel that once they\rquote d spoken about it, it seemed to help them say, ooh right now, I\rquote 
ll go back.  You know how a child, they can ask you something really deep and meaningful and you think, oh gosh, how am I going to answer that, and you say what you think is going to be best and they say, right I\rquote 
m off to play footie now, and they go and your left thinking, oh right [EMPHASIS].  They were like that, you would talk to them and they would come out with all these deep things and they\rquote d say oh alright I\rquote ll go back to 
class now, I feel ok now and they would go and you\rquote d think, oh right, I\rquote ve helped them.
\par 
\par We did have somebody coming with leaflets saying about bereavement counselling for pets and we did have leaflets about that but I don\rquote t think anybody took it up.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 That\rquote s interesting.  So where did that information come from, was it initiated by the school?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 No because we had so much publicity\'85 we had a lot of publicity because the press where getting fed up of foot and mouth and they wanted a different angle so they thought, is there an agricultural school, and we\rquote 
re the only one, so they came on us.  We had the Sun and the News of the World.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So national.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.  Everybody came and they interviewed; Border television, Cumberland News.  They all landed one day on us, and the Head had to do umpteen interviews and I think people said to me [PAUSE]\'85I\rquote 
ve forgotten what the question was. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Don\rquote t worry, I was just asking about the fact that you\rquote d had offers for bereavement counselling for pets.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.  And I think this is why, because we got so much advertising that they just said, oh look we\rquote ve got an outlet there, we\rquote ll come in and say.  So we put up posters and we gave out leaflets to the children, but I don
\rquote t think any of them took it up.  I think they all helped each other.}{\b\f0\insrsid866943  
\par 
\par What did you think of that media coverage?
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par [LAUGHTER] They covered it very well.  I mean they interviewed one particular girl who had to stay away from home.  They covered it very well [PAUSE],   but it was a hectic day a
nd we had people in and out and everywhere, and people phoning up with, can we come too, and we said, oh yes everybody else is here [TALKING LOUDLY HERE]    just come.   They took some photographs of our Science Technician feeding the lambs that were goin
g to be culled, which I thought was a bit sick. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Well yes, I was going to say that because of course the school had its own animals but they were all culled?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 They were all culled, and we were worried that it was going to happen during term time, because the children were coming in everyday and they were used to seeing the pigs and the sheep and everything.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So the school had sheep with lambs is that right?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Sheep, lambs and they had a huge pig with piglets, who was gorgeous.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So will the school restock?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 
Yes, hopefully shortly.  But what worried us was that we were going to have to shut the whole school down while the animals were in cull but we got round it by blocking off the agricultural block, which is over there, and use that as a separate\'85
 You know, nobody could go in there and it was all fenced off.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Animals are used as part of the curriculum were they?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 They were used in lots of different ways probably.  
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Well there is a lot of children as I say from farming community and some of them go to the agricultural college at Newton Rigg after here, so they\rquote 
re brought up to know how to bring up animals and butcher them and things [LAUGHTER].  Well it\rquote s part of their lives isn\rquote t it. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Well it\rquote s a natural cycle isn\rquote t it. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Well that is a very interesting point isn\rquote t it, because there have been some suggestion that it\rquote 
s all got a bit too emotive and farmers are used to killing their stock, but I think there is this sense that there is a life cycle isn\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Oh yes.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Even if it\rquote s short.  
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid866943 It upset me, because my brother in law had the farm\'85 I\rquote ve milked a lot of those cows and I knew them by name, do you know what I mean.  Well a lot of the farmers do.  When you\rquote 
re milking them every day you know all their little habits, you know what they are, and to lose them is awful.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 What was the worst aspect for you [emphasis] with foot and mouth?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 The worst aspect [LONG PAUSE].   In what context?  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 I\rquote ll leave it as broad as that. For some people it\rquote s straightforward for others its lots of bits.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 There were lots [EMPHASIS]  of bits.  It was just the fact of losing all those animals [SENTENCE WHISPERED]  and the impact it was going to have.  Because as I say, it\rquote s part of my [EMPHASIS]   life, I\rquote 
ve always been brought up in the Lake District.  And where do the farmers go from there, what do they do.  I know a lot of them have packed in, don\rquote 
t want to restock, but the ones who have sons coming on are having to stock.  I mean sheep are beginning to appear in the fields.  I don\rquote t thin
k my brother realised how bad it was being in the North East.  It was like Cumbria was sort of sectioned off and it was just all happening here and the rest of the country hadn\rquote t a clue what was going on. I know they did in Devon, but because we
\rquote re just a compact county [PAUSE]\'85 it was just awful to see.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Was there anything good that came out of it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 [LAUGHTER] Anything good [PAUSE].  I think it was just the sense of community spirit, where everybody helped everybody else.  And as I say, it\rquote s come on from there; it\rquote s brought people closer together.  I think that
\rquote s about the only thing that was good about it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 So do you think that is sustainable?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I hope so [PAUSE].  At the time it\rquote s so intense that it\rquote s stronger then [PAUSE]  but when you start to talk about it, it brings it all back again.  We went through a lot with the book}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid866943 \chftn 
{\footnote \pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid866943 \chftn }{\insrsid866943  }}}{\f0\insrsid866943 
 [PAUSE]    and you\rquote d think you were getting over it and then you see all these films and you think, oh my gosh [EMPHASIS].  It just brings it all back again [PAUSE].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Do you feel that the crisis that you [emphasis] went through, I mean certainly in terms of what was happening here at the school but also at home, whether it had an impact on your health?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Just emotionally, emotionally tiring, I think.  Physically you just get on with it [LAUGHTER] 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 What, you [emphasis] get on with it?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Yes, I [EMPHASIS]  get on with it [LAUGHTER]
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And your children?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 They cope very well.  They supported their friends and helped them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 No health worries or problems sleeping?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 Little }{\f0\insrsid11031442 [son]}{\f0\insrsid866943  got upset as I say, when his friend lost their animals [SPEAKING QUIETLY, SLOWLY AND EMOTIVELY]    but I sat and talked to him and sort of said, he\rquote 
ll get some more [PAUSE]  and that satisfied him.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Just finally what do you see for the future.  Obviously foot and mouth had a huge impact but what are the farmers going to do now, particularly those who aren\rquote 
t going to restock.  Do you think that foot and mouth is going to have a long-term impact on Cumbrian farming communities?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I think so.  I think it wil
l.  Some of the farms have been established for so [EMPHASIS]  many years and some of the animals are irreplaceable, especially the herdwicks.  People are bitter who have lost specialised animals.  It affected everything.  Nobody would come near the count
y [PAUSE]   it was a no go zone, it was like we were cut off from everybody else.  I don\rquote t think the children will forget it in a hurry.  Having said that, now they don\rquote 
t seem to talk about it as they were doing but we are restocking soon so hopefully\'85  A lot of the sheep dogs I feel sorry for [VOICE TONE LOUDER AND LAUGHTER.]
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 That\rquote s interesting. What are they going to do about that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I think one of the worst things happened to me was, there was a field full of sheep down the road here and got up every day,
 they were still there, still there, you know, and I was in reception and a lady came in and she was in floods of tears, and I said, what\rquote s the matter, and she said, they\rquote ve just shot all the sheep down the road [PAUSE]  and they\rquote 
ve shot the sheep dog as well.  Apparently the farmer hadn\rquote 
t been told they were going to do this [PAUSE]  and I just thought there was no need [EMPHASIS]  for that, there was no need.  That was just awful and when I was driving home there was all sheep along the roadside [EMPHASIS].  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 And the reasons for shooting the dog? 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid866943 I don\rquote t know, you tell me.  It was those sorts of things, you know\'85  My neighbours, on the day that we found the cull, my neighbours were out and they were just crying [EMPHASIS] and we just cried together and
 said what are we going to do [EMPHASIS] you know, what\rquote s it going to be like [EMPHASIS].  But then we thought well it\rquote s the farmers we should think about. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 But like you said, it does have an impact on everyone else doesn\rquote t it.  
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid866943 
Oh it was the whole village.  Most of the children here are from small villages [PAUSE] and it was all of the villagers around [PAUSE] they were coming in with such awful tales, seeing carcasses [PAUSE]  and these trucks going past and smelt, and then you
 see these pyres.  Infact they were going to have a pyre over the back of the school here, and some neighbours complained and said the affect of the smell would affect them so they didn\rquote 
t do it in the end, they ended up taking them to a burial site [EXTREMELY UPSET AT THIS POINT].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 Is there anything that you would particularly like to comment on before I turn the tape off?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid866943 I can\rquote t think of anything off hand.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid866943 
\par I thanked G for her time}{\f0\insrsid866943 
\par }}