{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext21 Body Text 2;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1734127\rsid2033949\rsid2128203\rsid3552693\rsid3609558\rsid5660550\rsid8144850\rsid12145925\rsid12483867
\rsid13383243\rsid13845087\rsid15084715}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author Health Research Lancaster University}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy14\hr15\min32}{\version5}{\edmins4}{\nofpages18}
{\nofwords7779}{\nofchars44342}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws52017}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180
\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot13383243 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5660550 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5660550 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5660550 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5660550 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid15084715 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid3552693 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid15084715 
\par Diary ID:       PM54}{\insrsid15084715 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs16\insrsid15084715 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs16\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid2033949 18}}}{\cs16\insrsid15084715 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15084715 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15084715 
\par }{\ul\insrsid15084715 Information about diarist
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 Date of birth: 1943
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 1}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  }{
\b\insrsid15084715 Group 1 }{\insrsid15084715 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid15084715 Group 2 }{\insrsid15084715 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid15084715 Group 3 }{\insrsid15084715 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid15084715 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid15084715 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid15084715 Group 5 }{\insrsid15084715 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid15084715 Group 6 }{\insrsid15084715 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid15084715 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15084715 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15084715 Week 1
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 Thurs: Phone call from DEFRA regarding damage to buildings
\par Fri: visit from DEFRA to cost the damage
\par Christmas week but nobody seems to be in festive mood. }{\fs24\insrsid8144850 [son]}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  spent Christmas Day with girlfriend\rquote s family, (daughter) was working in local hotel, }{\fs24\insrsid8144850 [other son]}{
\fs24\insrsid15084715  gave Christmas day a miss this year. }{\fs24\insrsid8144850 [wife]}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  and I decided to go out for Christmas dinner.
\par We still have no breeding ewes on the farm yet, which is quite worrying as we have quota for 900 and the retention period is only 6 weeks away}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715 
 Subsidy is paid only on the number of sheep for which a farm has quota. The number on which subsidy is applied for must be in residence on the farm during the \lquote retention period\rquote 
. After FMD farmers had to have a a minimum proportion of their quota in order to qualify and to retain their quota.. If farmers fail to keep their full quota number part of their quota is permanently withdrawn
\par   }}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 .
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
 We had a visit from DEFRA on Friday. We had a lot of damage done to walls, gates etc when the slaughtered animals were being loaded into lorries. DEFRA seems to question the cost of everything. Back in march 
they told us what had to be done and they would pay for it, but now they don\rquote t seem to be so keen. We are sick of hearing from them, and wish the FMD saga was ended.. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 2
\par }{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
The week began with the news that more sheep have been slaughtered in Northumberland. We were going to look at some store lambs at Allandale but DEFRA have put movement restrictions on the area so things are at a standstill again. This has been the most d
epressing thing the last 2 months, trying to get stock back on the farm. We see DEFRA officials on the TV every week. Crowing about how well they have done getting FMD under control. If they had got on with the job last March we wouldn\rquote 
t be in the state we are today.
\par We are still no nearer getting any breeding ewes. A friend who buys sheep in the north of Scotland went to look at some for us, but he thought they were too dear. Went to New Year\rquote s party at friend\rquote 
s house, mainly farmers, the only time FMD was mentioned was at midnight when everybody said good riddance to 2001.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13383243 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 3
\par Monday: sold first sheep today
\par Back in business, took the first fat lambs for 10 months to Longtown collection centre. Feel a lot more confident this week. We expect the auction to open in mid-Feb. I don\rquote t like the way we are selling them at the moment as you don\rquote 
t know how much you are going to get for them, but it is better than nothing.. 
\par We made a lot of hay last summer and we advertised in the Farmers Guardian}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  widely read weekly agricultural newspaper}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
. We were surprised at the number of enquiries we had as far away as the midlands. The cash from the hay will be very welcome as we have had no income for 6 months.
\par A few friends and neighbours I have spoken to have not started to stock up yet and don\rquote t seem to be in any hurry to start again. Some of them seem to have got rid of a lot of debt and don\rquote 
t want to go up the same road again. When you have no cows to milk or stock to feed, every weekend off for 6 months you soon see how the other half live. 
\par 
\par Week 4
\par A very sad week, }{\fs24\insrsid2033949 a}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
 very close friend died on Thursday. We had known one another for over 30 years. With played golf and darts, and he was very well liked in the local community. He was always optimistic about farming after the F&M.
\par We are still trying to get some breeding ewes, but it is very difficult as most of them are a long way off. You feel very frustrated if you travel hundreds of miles and the sheep are not of the standard you expected, and you return home e
mpty-handed. All restrictions have been lifted in the UK this week so we expect things will be getting back to normal now. It doesn't seem 11 months ago since F&M started. Hopefully all the disasters are behind us now and we can expect a better future.

\par 
\par Week 5
\par We had 250 in-lamb ewes delivered this week. The farm is now functioning the more like pre F& M days now. DEFRA have started to lift restrictions, but having to get movement licences is still a bit of a drag. Met a lot of friends this week at a friend
's funeral. Had not seen some of them for over 12 months due to the F&M. It certainly makes a difference to life with all auctions closed and social events cancelled. Some of them told me they had not left their farms for over six months. A few still had 
no stock and weren\rquote 
t going to stock up, until the spring. One friend who milked about 200 cows thought there was no incentive to start again. It had taken him six months to get over the slaughtering of his cows. The herd had been started by his grandfather 
over 60 years ago. Listening to farmers some have taken it very badly others just think it's a disaster waiting to happen, but there is one thing, things will never be the same again.
\par 
\par Week 6
\par The long awaited Curry}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 
\chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Government-commissioned report into the future of farming}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  report was published this week. Farming is unsustainable in its present form acco
rding to the report. It must be music to the ears for Mrs Beckett and her team at DEFRA. They insist subsidies must be phased out, and farms should have less stock. I think it is a good idea, but food prices will have to rise, and will the public pay for 
i
t. (?) Nothing was mentioned about illegally imported meat. If this was the cause of the outbreak last year you would have thought it would be the first thing it would have done. I don't think these proposals will come to anything as the rest of the farme
rs in Europe won\rquote t wear them.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
We got some more breeding sheep out of Scotland this week. We have now about 50 per cent of the number we had last year. Things are slowly getting back to normal but you keep thinking what surprises are around the corner.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par Week 7
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
As we are into Feb now I start to think what happened a year ago more often. I sometimes wonder, did it really happen or was it just a bad dream. This time last year we were preparing for lambing, getting sheds ready etc to bring ewes inside then disast
er struck, the foot and mouth outbreak. I can\rquote t say I\rquote 
m looking forward to this year's lambing after what happened last year even though we have only half as many ewes. I don't think anybody else is round about either. The local auctions are hoping to get 
restarted in the next two or three weeks. But I believe DEFRA are giving them a lot of hassle. I think DEFRA would have liked to have seen them shut down for good. We have been taking cattle and sheep to the collection centres but you are never sure how m
uch you are going to get until a week later when the money comes in the post. The 20 day standstill is the biggest hurdle for us. The only way we can get round it is by sending cattle and sheep the straight to slaughter. 
\par 
\par 
\par Week 8
\par T{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0003}hings{\*\bkmkend _B003f0003} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0004}are{\*\bkmkend _B003f0004} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0005}slowly{\*\bkmkend _B003f0005} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0006}getting{\*\bkmkend _B003f0006} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0007}back
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0007} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0008}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f0008} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0009}normal{\*\bkmkstart _B003f000a}{\*\bkmkend _B003f0009}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f000a} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f000b}We{\*\bkmkend _B003f000b} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f000c}
have{\*\bkmkend _B003f000c} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f000d}been{\*\bkmkend _B003f000d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f000e}able{\*\bkmkend _B003f000e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f000f}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f000f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0010}sell{\*\bkmkend _B003f0010} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0011}more{\*\bkmkend _B003f0011} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0012}stock{\*\bkmkend _B003f0012} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0013}this{\*\bkmkend _B003f0013} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0014}last{\*\bkmkend _B003f0014} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0018}week or two.
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0018} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0019}But{\*\bkmkend _B003f0019} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f001a}as{\*\bkmkend _B003f001a} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f001b}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f001b} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f001c}auctions{\*\bkmkend _B003f001c} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f001d}are{\*\bkmkend _B003f001d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f001e}open{\*\bkmkend _B003f001e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f001f}next{\*\bkmkend _B003f001f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0020}week{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0021}{\*\bkmkend _B003f0020},
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0021} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0022}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f0022} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0023}20{\*\bkmkend _B003f0023} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0024}day{\*\bkmkend _B003f0024} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0025}standstill{\*\bkmkend _B003f0025} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0026}is{\*\bkmkend _B003f0026} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0027}going{\*\bkmkend _B003f0027} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0028}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f0028} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0029}be{\*\bkmkend _B003f0029} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f002a}a{\*\bkmkend _B003f002a
} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f002b}major{\*\bkmkend _B003f002b} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f002c}headache{\*\bkmkstart _B003f002d}{\*\bkmkend _B003f002c}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f002d} DEFRA {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0031}wants{\*\bkmkend _B003f0031} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0032}to
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0032} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0033}keep{\*\bkmkend _B003f0033} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0034}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f0034} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0035}stranglehold{\*\bkmkend _B003f0035} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0036}on{\*\bkmkend _B003f0036} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0037}all{\*\bkmkend _B003f0037} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0038}movements{\*\bkmkend _B003f0038} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0039}of{\*\bkmkend _B003f0039} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003a}stock{\*\bkmkend _B003f003a}, {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003b}it
{\*\bkmkend _B003f003b} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003c}makes{\*\bkmkend _B003f003c} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003d}your{\*\bkmkend _B003f003d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003e}blood{\*\bkmkend _B003f003e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f003f}boil{\*\bkmkend _B003f003f} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0040}when{\*\bkmkend _B003f0040} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0041}you{\*\bkmkend _B003f0041} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0042}can't{\*\bkmkend _B003f0042} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0043}get{\*\bkmkend _B003f0043} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0044}stock
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0044} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0045}on{\*\bkmkend _B003f0045} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0046}and{\*\bkmkend _B003f0046} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0047}off{\*\bkmkend _B003f0047} the f{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0049}arm{\*\bkmkstart _B003f004a}
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0049}.{\*\bkmkstart _B003f004b}{\*\bkmkend _B003f004a}
\par {\*\bkmkstart _B003f004c}{\*\bkmkend _B003f004b}Talked{\*\bkmkend _B003f004c} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f004d}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f004d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f004e}one{\*\bkmkend _B003f004e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f004f}or{\*\bkmkend _B003f004f} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0050}two{\*\bkmkend _B003f0050} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0051}neighbours{\*\bkmkend _B003f0051} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0052}this{\*\bkmkend _B003f0052} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0053}week{\*\bkmkend _B003f0053} who are {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0056}just
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0056} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0057}about{\*\bkmkend _B003f0057} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0058}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f0058} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0059}start{\*\bkmkend _B003f0059} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f005a}and{\*\bkmkend _B003f005a} stock up 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f005d}again{\*\bkmkstart _B003f005e}{\*\bkmkend _B003f005d}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f005e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f005f}None{\*\bkmkend _B003f005f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0060}of{\*\bkmkend _B003f0060} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0061}them
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0061} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0062}seemed{\*\bkmkend _B003f0062} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0063}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f0063} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0064}be{\*\bkmkend _B003f0064} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0065}too{\*\bkmkend _B003f0065} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0066}confident{\*\bkmkend _B003f0066} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0067}about{\*\bkmkend _B003f0067} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0068}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f0068} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0069}future{\*\bkmkstart _B003f006a}{\*\bkmkend _B003f0069}.
{\*\bkmkend _B003f006a} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f006b}The{\*\bkmkend _B003f006b}y think {\*\bkmkstart _B003f006d}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f006d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f006e}government{\*\bkmkend _B003f006e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f006f}has{\*\bkmkend _B003f006f} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0070}got{\*\bkmkend _B003f0070} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0071}us{\*\bkmkend _B003f0071} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0072}where{\*\bkmkend _B003f0072} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0073}they{\*\bkmkend _B003f0073} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0074}want
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0074} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0075}us{\*\bkmkend _B003f0075} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0076}and{\*\bkmkend _B003f0076} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0077}they{\*\bkmkend _B003f0077} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0078}are{\*\bkmkend _B003f0078} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0079}not{\*\bkmkend _B003f0079} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f007a}going{\*\bkmkend _B003f007a} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f007b}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f007b} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f007c}let{\*\bkmkend _B003f007c} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f007d}go
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f007e}{\*\bkmkend _B003f007d}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f007e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f007f}The{\*\bkmkend _B003f007f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0080}government{\*\bkmkend _B003f0080} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0081}wants{\*\bkmkend _B003f0081} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0082}farmers{\*\bkmkend _B003f0082} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0083}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f0083} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0084}diversify{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0085}{\*\bkmkend _B003f0084},{\*\bkmkend _B003f0085} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0086}but
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0086} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0087}we{\*\bkmkend _B003f0087} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0088}can't{\*\bkmkend _B003f0088} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0089}all{\*\bkmkend _B003f0089} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f008a}go {\*\bkmkend _B003f008a}into B&B 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f008f}and{\*\bkmkend _B003f008f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0090}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f0090} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0091}like{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0092}{\*\bkmkend _B003f0091}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f0092} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0093}Most
{\*\bkmkend _B003f0093} farmers\rquote  {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0095}wives{\*\bkmkend _B003f0095} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0096}in{\*\bkmkend _B003f0096} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0097}this{\*\bkmkend _B003f0097} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f0098}area{\*\bkmkend _B003f0098} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f0099}have{\*\bkmkend _B003f0099} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f009a}part-time{\*\bkmkend _B003f009a} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f009b}jobs{\*\bkmkstart _B003f009c}{\*\bkmkend _B003f009b},{\*\bkmkend _B003f009c} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f009d}and
{\*\bkmkend _B003f009d} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f009e}there{\*\bkmkend _B003f009e} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f009f}is{\*\bkmkend _B003f009f} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a0}very{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a0} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a1}little{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a1} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a2}hired{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a2} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a3}labour{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a3} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a4}on{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a4} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a5}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a5} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a6}farms
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a7}{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a6}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a7} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00a8}Most{\*\bkmkend _B003f00a8} farmers\rquote  {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00aa}sons{\*\bkmkend _B003f00aa} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ab}have{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ab} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ac}part-time{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ac} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ad}jobs{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ad} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ae}in{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ae} auctions etc. {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b4}The{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b4} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b5}
local{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b5} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b6}small{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b6} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b7}businesses{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b7} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b8}round{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b8} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00b9}here{\*\bkmkend _B003f00b9} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ba}have{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ba} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00bb}really{\*\bkmkend _B003f00bb} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00bc}had{\*\bkmkend _B003f00bc} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00bd}a{\*\bkmkend _B003f00bd} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00be}bad
{\*\bkmkend _B003f00be} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00bf}time{\*\bkmkend _B003f00bf} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c0}since{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c0} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c1}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c1} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c5}F&M.{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c5} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c6}They{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c6} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c7}rightly{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c7} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c8}think{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c8} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00c9}they{\*\bkmkend _B003f00c9} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ca}have
{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ca} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00cb}been{\*\bkmkend _B003f00cb} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00cc}forgotten{\*\bkmkend _B003f00cc} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00cd}about{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00ce}{\*\bkmkend _B003f00cd}.{\*\bkmkend _B003f00ce} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00cf}Country{\*\bkmkend _B003f00cf} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d0}people{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d0} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d1}have{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d1} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d2}come{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d2} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d3}to
{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d3} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d4}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d4} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d5}conclusion{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d5} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d6}that{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d6} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d7}they{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d7} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d8}have{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d8} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00d9}to{\*\bkmkend _B003f00d9} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00da}keep{\*\bkmkend _B003f00da} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00db}the{\*\bkmkend _B003f00db} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00dc}countryside
{\*\bkmkend _B003f00dc} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00dd}spick{\*\bkmkend _B003f00dd} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00de}and{\*\bkmkend _B003f00de} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00df}span{\*\bkmkend _B003f00df} {\*\bkmkstart _B003f00e0}for{\*\bkmkend _B003f00e0}
 the townspeople to enjoy on a Sunday
\par 
\par Week 9
\par This time last year the nightmare had begun. Everything was at a complete standstill, you could not even move stock across the road
. We were just preparing to start lambing and had 800 ewes stuck in fields and could not get them inside. We spoke to our vet to see if we could get MAFF to allow us to fetch them in, but he said it would be a waste of time asking, as they had told him Lo
n
gtown market were up to their eyes in it. To make matters worse we had a blizzard and had about a foot of snow on the ground. It was certainly the worst week of my farming life. You could hardy believe that a pig found with F&M in an Essex slaughterhouse 
c
ould cause chaos across the country in a matter of days. People around here have started talking about it again and wonder if it is completely gone yet. There have been some sheep found with antibodies in the Kirkby Stephen area this week, hopefully it is
 just a blip in the restocking procedure. Hopefully over the next few months farming will get back to what it was pre F&M and we can start to forget about this last 12 months
\par 
\par Week 10
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 Thoughts keep going back to this time last year. F&M broke out round Long
town this week last year. Everybody was stunned, wondering were it was going to happen next. As we now know we were slaughtered out the next week. Funny thing is nobody mentions much about it , but you know everybody is thinking about it. After a year we 
hope things will get back to normal, but with all the restrictions and movement standstills DEFRA doesn\rquote 
t seem to want to get back top normal again. The local auctions are having difficulty getting back to pre-F&M. The supermarkets would rather by-pass the 
auctions and source the stock straight from the farms. The first live sales in England have started, but there isn\rquote 
t much stock being sold. The twenty day standstill has kept the numbers down. We have been sending our sheep and cattle to the collection cen
tres as it is the only way to get round the 20 day standstill. I think we are going to have to put up with a lot more red tape and restrictions. I think farmers are going to have to struggle on as we have for the last few years. It makes you wonder if it 
is all worth it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 11
\par It is now a year ago this week that we had F&M. Every day your thoughts go back to the same day last year remembering what we were doing. Sometimes meet friends and neighbours to speak to and they all say it\rquote s different to this tim
e last year. There is still one or two have not started back in farming yet. They just don\rquote 
t seem to have the stomach to restart yet. Any stock that is getting sold at the minute seems to be very expensive, so it is not easy for them to start back yet. We 
have been buying and selling quite a lot of stock lately, and it is good to get back into the swing of things. Once spring gets here and the fields are full of stock once again, we will be able to put the disasters of last year behind us. I think most far
mers are more worried what the government are going to do in the next few months more than anything else. They don\rquote t seem to have taken much interest in Cumbria these last few months. At least the Prince of Wales has.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par Week 12
\par Everybody feeling a lot better
 this week now that the first week of March has passed and the memory of last year can be put in the past. I think if we could trade livestock without the need of licenses etc the memory would fade faster. The government seems to hope that live auctions f
o
r stock will end if they keep restrictions on them for the next few months. The government says that the country is clear of F&M, so why are all these restrictions still in operation. A lot of farmers sons work in auctions part time, and they are all out 
of a job at the moment and are finding it very tough to earn a living. The government don\rquote 
t seem to realise what kind of affect they are having on country life. The small businesses are still having a tough time of it and they think they will never see the good times again.
\par 
\par Week 13
\par There has been a lot of talk about inquiries this last few weeks but the government does not seem to want to know. I think if we don\rquote t have a full public inquiry we will never know the full facts. The way the government is acting
 they would rather sweep it under the carpet and forget about it. I think there will be very few people that will know where F&M came from and they will be in the heart of the government. Nothing seems to be being done about all the illegal meat that is c
oming into the country. We are preparing to start lambing in the next week or so, so we will be quite busy and will not have time to think about what happened last year. The weather could do us a big favour if it would dry up and had some nice sunshine

\par 
\par Week 14
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
After a very wet weekend, the sun has shone for most of the week. It does make lambing a lot easier when it is warm and there is plenty of sun. We have a lot more cattle now so there is no room inside for the ewes. It is the first time that we have la
mbed outside for about thirty years. A good lambing would certainly compensate for last years disaster. Lambing ewes are very scarce in Cumbria as you can\rquote 
t get a pet lamb for love nor money. We are still having difficulty in getting stock sold. This 20 day standstill will have a disastrous effect on farming if the govt doesn\rquote 
t do something about it. I thought the country was free from F&M? Press is full of the meeting between DEFRA, Blair, NFU about the future of farming. The government want to get rid of subsidies, but as long as we are tied to the EEC I don\rquote 
t think they have a hope in hell. It was always thought that after the F&M shambles the government would put the boot in.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par Week 15 
\par The weather has turned for the better this week. It must have known that we were starting to lamb. It makes things a lot easier when the weather is good as we are lambing outside this year, the first time for over twenty years. We are still having difficu
lty in marketing our fat lambs and fat cattle due to the twenty day standstill.
\par Have spoken to one or two farmers who say they have completely ignored it as they reckon they will go out of business if they stick to the rules. DEFRA must know that these rest
rictions cant last much longer. I suppose it keeps the price of food down, so they will keep them as long as possible
\par 
\par 
\par Week 16
\par (respondent and family busy lambing)
\par Still good weather for lambing which is going well. We have three hundred blackface ewes fi
rst time we have had this breed and we are pleased with them. What a difference to this time last year. Not an animal on the farm and all we were doing was washing out buildings.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15084715 Have heard this last week that there is a lot of farmers around Wigton that h
ave not started to re stock yet. It is not surprising as the price of milk is on the way down and store cattle for beef production are very dear. It certainly looks as though there is going to (be) big changes in farming in Cumbria.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par Week 17 (lambing)
\par A su
rprise knock on the door on Tuesday morning, a lady from DEFRA wondered if it would be possible to count our breeding ewes for the subsidy. After all the talk about bio-security I though they would be the last people to come and wander about among the she
ep. I managed to put her off for a couple of days and she came back on Thursday and got the job done. She said she had a few frosty receptions with some farmers and I told her that it didn\rquote 
t surprise me. Lambing is going really well at the minute with very few problems. Still selling fat cattle and sheep through the collection centres, but have to wait a week to see how much you get for them.
\par 
\par Week 18 (lambing)
\par The weather turned very wet last weekend and it has been a lot colder for most of the week. Nearly
 finished lambing now which has been the easiest that I can rem(em)ber. Read in the local paper that the NFU was hoping that some of the restrictions would be lifted in the near future on the store market for breeding sheep. It is about time something was
 done as there is no pleasure in farming at the moment with all these dos and don}{\fs24\insrsid3609558 \rquote }{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
ts. Scotland seems to have got on a lot faster with the post FM restrictions. DEFRA have got the numbers of sheep down in Cumbria, and they are going to try and keep it that way.
\par 
\par Week 19 WB 29/4/02
\par This is the best lambing weather we have had for years. We are just about finished now, and it is a great relief after the shambles of last year. We are still struggling to get good prices for our feeding hoggs. We have about five h
undred still to sell. Still having to sell direct to the abattoirs as we are buying in cattle for fattening and this is the only way round the twenty day standstill rule. I am now convinced the government will not lift it as it will certainly put some of 
the auction marts out of business and that is what the government wants. There is quite a lot of concern about TB in the area. One or two farmers have stocked up with animals from the south of the country w(h)ere TB is still about.
\par 
\par Week 20
\par WB 6/5/02
\par A much quieter week this on the work front. Lambing finished and all the crop in}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Barley sown}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
. The weather is still dry but rather cold. Had a day off this week at Kelso races. A local farming society has a bus trip there every year. Met a few farmers who had 
had F&M and had not got back into action yet. One farmer who had his dairy stock slaughtered said he hadn\rquote t got over it yet. He had spent 25 years building up his herd and was devastated when they were slaughtered. I think those with cows}{
\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715 
 i.e. dairy or breeding herds}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  have took it very badly. Scotland seems to be getting back to normal a lot quicker than this side of the border.
\par They have had a few shows already with cattle and sheep. This side of the border they are having shows without any livestock, thanks to DEFRA
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  22    
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
Animal health officer from DEFRA called regarding the TB testing. After she looked at all the movements and where our stock came from, she thought it would be unlikely that we would be to test. Most of our cattle are here for fa
ttening, they are most worried about breeding stock, what a relief.
\par The local public enquiry}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 
\chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Cumbria Inquiry. Public meetings at 5 venues, + formal public hearings at Kendal and Carlisle}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  has been doing the rounds lately. I haven\rquote 
t been to any of them but I believe a few of the speakers have had horror stories to tell. I don\rquote 
t think these meetings will do a lot of good, as the government just wants to forget the whole thing. Was at a farm sale at the weekend, the farmers was wiped out with F&M so he thought it was a good time to pack in farming.
\par }{\fs24\insrsid15084715\charrsid3609558 
\par }\trowd \irow0\irowband0\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl 
\cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\pararsid3609558 {\fs24\insrsid15084715\charrsid3609558 WEEK  23     WB 27/5/02 \cell }\pard 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715\charrsid3609558 \trowd \irow0\irowband0\lastrow 
\ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth3\trwWidth8550\trftsWidthB3\trftsWidthA3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil 
\cellx8550\row }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
Store sheep sales started this week in Longtown Auction. There was quite a lot of interest but not much action. Numbers were very low, when it is usually one of the busiest times for selling ewes and lambs. It seems a lot of farmers don\rquote 
t want to get tied into this twenty day standstill and are not bothering to buy any. The restrictions that DEFRA are putting on farmers now are strangling the industry. The news that Bobby Waugh}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715 
 Farmer whose farm was thought to be source of first infected animals in UK outbreak  2001. He was prosecuted for his farming practice/welfare and later banned from keeping animals for 15 years.}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  was found guilty wasn\rquote 
t a big surprise. I think the state veteniary service was just as guilty as they had inspected his farm just weeks before the outbreak of F&M
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  24  Week begin 3/6/02    
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
The weather has been a bit better this week, a few local farmers have started to silage. There seems to b
e abundance of grass this year. I suppose the reason being is that there is very few sheep around. The local village hall had a Jubilee fun night at the weekend. It is the first real \'93Do\'94
 that we have had in the hall since the start of FM. There was a big 
turn-out from all walks of life. It is good to see the countryside pulling together, as the national government seems to have washed their hands on us. I got quite a shock at the number of strangers that turned up at the \'93do\'94
. It seems that the countryside is getting overrun with townspeople. I am not against them but some of them try to take everything over, and they don\rquote t know how the countryside works.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  25  Week begin 10/6/02    
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\pararsid3609558 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 \cell }\pard 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 \trowd \irow0\irowband0\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl
\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\row }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
This week the weather turned for the worse. Most of the cows in the
 district are back indoors, and silage making has come to a standstill. Farming can ill afford bad weather at this time of year when prices are so low. We have just about got all the fat hoggets}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Last year\rquote s lambs}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
 sold. The price has risen the last few weeks, there isn\rquote t a lot of spring lambs about yet. There isn\rquote 
t a lot of pleasure selling stock at the moment, you just send them away and hope that you get a good price for them. I have only been at one auction since they opened up again, I just have no interest going when you can\rquote 
t wander through the pens without dressing up with oilskins on. Farming at the minute is like living in a police state. They are doing their best to put the auction marts out of business.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  26  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid3609558 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715    WB 17/602
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
The big talking point this week is the weather. The land is a complete bog. silaging and land work is at a complete standstill. We still have our sheep to clip, I can never remember clipping after the middle of June. The bad weather
 is the last thing we want after the disaster of last year. Most farmers I speak to wonder why we struggle on. Saw the minister speaking on TV about changing the CAP}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Common }{\insrsid13845087 A}{\insrsid15084715 gricultural }{
\insrsid13845087 P}{\insrsid15084715 olicy. Subsidy schemes from EEC}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  she says the government will go it
 alone and phase out subsidies. I think food prices would have to rise 30%. Most farmers think the public have had a good deal out of the CAP. The government seems to think farmers would be better off without subsidies but I can\rquote 
t see it, the way they let other countries dump cheap food on us.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  28  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 July
\par {\*\bkmkstart _B00060001}The{\*\bkmkend _B00060001} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060002}local{\*\bkmkend _B00060002} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060003}press{\*\bkmkend _B00060003} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060004}this{\*\bkmkstart _B00060006}{\*\bkmkend _B00060004} weekend
{\*\bkmkend _B00060006} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060007}is{\*\bkmkend _B00060007} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060008}full{\*\bkmkend _B00060008} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060009}of{\*\bkmkend _B00060009} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006000a}stories{\*\bkmkend _B0006000a} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0006000b}about{\*\bkmkend _B0006000b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006000c}Dr{\*\bkmkend _B0006000c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006000d}Peter{\*\bkmkend _B0006000d} Tiplady {\*\bkmkstart _B00060012}admitting{\*\bkmkend _B00060012} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060013}that
{\*\bkmkend _B00060013} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060014}the{\*\bkmkend _B00060014} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060015}public{\*\bkmkend _B00060015} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060016}were{\*\bkmkend _B00060016} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060017}at{\*\bkmkend _B00060017} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060018}risk{\*\bkmkend _B00060018} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060019}from{\*\bkmkend _B00060019} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001a}the{\*\bkmkend _B0006001a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001b}burning{\*\bkmkend _B0006001b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001c}of
{\*\bkmkend _B0006001c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001d}animals{\*\bkmkend _B0006001d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001e}during{\*\bkmkend _B0006001e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006001f}the{\*\bkmkend _B0006001f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060020}F{\*\bkmkend _B00060020} & 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060022}M{\*\bkmkend _B00060022} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060023}epidemic{\*\bkmkstart _B00060024}{\*\bkmkend _B00060023}.{\*\bkmkend _B00060024} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060025}W{\*\bkmkend _B00060025}ell {\*\bkmkstart _B00060026}I
{\*\bkmkend _B00060026} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060027}heard{\*\bkmkend _B00060027} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060028}him{\*\bkmkend _B00060028} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060029}say{\*\bkmkend _B00060029} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006002a}that{\*\bkmkend _B0006002a} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0006002b}there{\*\bkmkend _B0006002b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006002c}was{\*\bkmkend _B0006002c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006002d}no{\*\bkmkend _B0006002d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006002e}danger{\*\bkmkend _B0006002e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006002f}to
{\*\bkmkend _B0006002f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060030}health{\*\bkmkend _B00060030} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060032}at a{\*\bkmkend _B00060032} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060033}public{\*\bkmkend _B00060033} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060034}meeting{\*\bkmkend _B00060034} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060035}in{\*\bkmkend _B00060035} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060036}April{\*\bkmkend _B00060036} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060038}2001{\*\bkmkend _B00060038} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006003c}there{\*\bkmkend _B0006003c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006003d}was
{\*\bkmkend _B0006003d} two or {\*\bkmkstart _B00060040}three{\*\bkmkend _B00060040} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060041}experts{\*\bkmkend _B00060041} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060042}in{\*\bkmkend _B00060042} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060043}the{\*\bkmkend _B00060043} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060044}audience{\*\bkmkstart _B00060045}{\*\bkmkend _B00060044},{\*\bkmkend _B00060045} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060046}and{\*\bkmkend _B00060046} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060047}they{\*\bkmkend _B00060047} blew {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a4}him
{\*\bkmkend _B000600a4} {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a5}to{\*\bkmkend _B000600a5} {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a6}bits{\*\bkmkend _B000600a6}. {\*\bkmkstart _B0006004d}It{\*\bkmkend _B0006004d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006004e}is{\*\bkmkend _B0006004e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006004f
}amazing{\*\bkmkend _B0006004f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060050}that{\*\bkmkend _B00060050} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060051}somebody{\*\bkmkend _B00060051} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060052}in{\*\bkmkend _B00060052} such a {\*\bkmkstart _B00060056}senior{\*\bkmkend _B00060056} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060057}position{\*\bkmkstart _B00060058}{\*\bkmkend _B00060057},{\*\bkmkend _B00060058} {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a7}can{\*\bkmkend _B000600a7} {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a8}admit{\*\bkmkend _B000600a8} a {\*\bkmkstart _B0006005c}year
{\*\bkmkend _B0006005c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006005d}after{\*\bkmkend _B0006005d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006005e}that{\*\bkmkend _B0006005e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006005f}he{\*\bkmkend _B0006005f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060060}didn't{\*\bkmkend _B00060060} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060061}believe{\*\bkmkend _B00060061} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060062}what{\*\bkmkend _B00060062} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060063}he{\*\bkmkend _B00060063} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060064}was{\*\bkmkend _B00060064} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060065}saying
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060066}{\*\bkmkend _B00060065}.{\*\bkmkend _B00060066} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060067}It{\*\bkmkend _B00060067} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060068}is{\*\bkmkend _B00060068} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060069}obvious{\*\bkmkend _B00060069} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006006a
}that{\*\bkmkend _B0006006a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006006b}he{\*\bkmkend _B0006006b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006006c}was{\*\bkmkend _B0006006c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006006d}told{\*\bkmkend _B0006006d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006006e}what{\*\bkmkend _B0006006e} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0006006f}to{\*\bkmkend _B0006006f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060070}say{\*\bkmkend _B00060070} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060074}by MAFF.
\par {\*\bkmkstart _B00060075}{\*\bkmkend _B00060074}The{\*\bkmkend _B00060075} weather {\*\bkmkstart _B00060078}gets{\*\bkmkend _B00060078} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060079}no{\*\bkmkend _B00060079} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006007a}better{\*\bkmkstart _B0006007b}
{\*\bkmkend _B0006007a},{\*\bkmkend _B0006007b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006007c}we{\*\bkmkend _B0006007c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006007d}still{\*\bkmkend _B0006007d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006007e}haven't{\*\bkmkend _B0006007e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006007f}got
{\*\bkmkend _B0006007f} the sheep {\*\bkmkstart _B00060082}clipped{\*\bkmkend _B00060082} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060083}or{\*\bkmkend _B00060083} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060084}any{\*\bkmkend _B00060084} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060087}hay made.{\*\bkmkend _B00060087} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060088}A{\*\bkmkend _B00060088} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060089}lot{\*\bkmkend _B00060089} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008a}of{\*\bkmkend _B0006008a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008b}farmers{\*\bkmkend _B0006008b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008c}around
{\*\bkmkend _B0006008c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008d}here{\*\bkmkend _B0006008d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008e}are{\*\bkmkend _B0006008e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006008f}getting{\*\bkmkend _B0006008f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060090}quite{\*\bkmkend _B00060090} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00060091}desperate{\*\bkmkend _B00060091} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060092}as{\*\bkmkend _B00060092} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060093}most{\*\bkmkend _B00060093} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060094}of{\*\bkmkend _B00060094} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060095}the
{\*\bkmkend _B00060095} cows {\*\bkmkstart _B00060097}are{\*\bkmkend _B00060097} {\*\bkmkstart _B00060098}still{\*\bkmkend _B00060098} in {\*\bkmkstart _B0006009a}and{\*\bkmkend _B0006009a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006009b}they{\*\bkmkend _B0006009b} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0006009c}haven't{\*\bkmkend _B0006009c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006009d}got{\*\bkmkend _B0006009d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006009e}any{\*\bkmkend _B0006009e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0006009f}silage{\*\bkmkend _B0006009f} {\*\bkmkstart _B000600a0}yet
{\*\bkmkstart _B000600a1}{\*\bkmkend _B000600a0}.{\*\bkmkend _B000600a1}
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  29  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 July
\par {\*\bkmkstart _B00090001}The{\*\bkmkend _B00090001} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090002}weather{\*\bkmkend _B00090002} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090003}is{\*\bkmkend _B00090003} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090004}making{\*\bkmkend _B00090004} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090005}everybody
{\*\bkmkend _B00090005} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090006}very{\*\bkmkend _B00090006} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090007}depressed{\*\bkmkstart _B00090008}{\*\bkmkend _B00090007}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090008} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090009}After{\*\bkmkend _B00090009} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0009000a}last{\*\bkmkend _B0009000a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009000b}year's{\*\bkmkend _B0009000b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009000c}disaster{\*\bkmkend _B0009000c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009000d}of{\*\bkmkend _B0009000d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009000e}this
{\*\bkmkend _B0009000e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009000f}is{\*\bkmkend _B0009000f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090010}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090010} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090011}last{\*\bkmkend _B00090011} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090012}thing{\*\bkmkend _B00090012} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090013}we{\*\bkmkend _B00090013} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090014}wanted{\*\bkmkstart _B00090015}{\*\bkmkend _B00090014}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090015} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090016}I've{\*\bkmkend _B00090016} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090017}spoken
{\*\bkmkend _B00090017} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090018}to{\*\bkmkend _B00090018} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090019}a{\*\bkmkend _B00090019} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009001a}few{\*\bkmkend _B0009001a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009001b}farmers{\*\bkmkstart _B0009001c}
{\*\bkmkend _B0009001b},{\*\bkmkend _B0009001c} who {\*\bkmkstart _B0009001e}have{\*\bkmkend _B0009001e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009001f}told{\*\bkmkend _B0009001f} me {\*\bkmkstart _B00090022}that{\*\bkmkend _B00090022} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090023}they
{\*\bkmkend _B00090023} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090024}wished{\*\bkmkend _B00090024} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090025}they{\*\bkmkend _B00090025} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090026}hadn't{\*\bkmkend _B00090026} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090027}r{\*\bkmkend _B00090027}e
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090028}stocked{\*\bkmkend _B00090028} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009002c}now.{\*\bkmkend _B0009002c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009002d}Some{\*\bkmkend _B0009002d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009002e}farmers{\*\bkmkend _B0009002e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009002f}have
{\*\bkmkend _B0009002f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090031}all their stock{\*\bkmkend _B00090031} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090032}back{\*\bkmkend _B00090032} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090033}indoors{\*\bkmkstart _B00090034}{\*\bkmkend _B00090033},{\*\bkmkend _B00090034} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090035}and{\*\bkmkend _B00090035} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090036}they{\*\bkmkend _B00090036} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090037}are{\*\bkmkend _B00090037} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090038}trying{\*\bkmkend _B00090038} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090039}to
{\*\bkmkend _B00090039} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009003a}buy{\*\bkmkend _B0009003a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009003b}hay{\*\bkmkend _B0009003b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009003c}and{\*\bkmkend _B0009003c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009003d}silage{\*\bkmkend _B0009003d} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0009003e}to{\*\bkmkend _B0009003e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009003f}feed{\*\bkmkend _B0009003f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090040}them{\*\bkmkstart _B00090041}{\*\bkmkend _B00090040}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090041} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090042}Our
{\*\bkmkend _B00090042} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090043}next-door{\*\bkmkend _B00090043} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090044}neighbour{\*\bkmkend _B00090044} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090045}has{\*\bkmkend _B00090045} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090046}been{\*\bkmkend _B00090046} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090047}trying{\*\bkmkend _B00090047} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090048}to{\*\bkmkend _B00090048} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090049}make{\*\bkmkend _B00090049} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004a}silage{\*\bkmkend _B0009004a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004b}for
{\*\bkmkend _B0009004b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004c}over{\*\bkmkend _B0009004c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004d}a{\*\bkmkend _B0009004d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004e}month{\*\bkmkend _B0009004e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009004f}now{\*\bkmkstart _B00090050}
{\*\bkmkend _B0009004f}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090050} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090051}I{\*\bkmkend _B00090051} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090052}have{\*\bkmkend _B00090052} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090053}been{\*\bkmkend _B00090053} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090054}on{\*\bkmkend _B00090054} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090055}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090055} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090056}phone{\*\bkmkend _B00090056} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090057}to{\*\bkmkend _B00090057} sheep clippers but {\*\bkmkstart _B0009005b}they{\*\bkmkend _B0009005b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009005c}
have{\*\bkmkend _B0009005c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009005d}no{\*\bkmkend _B0009005d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009005e}idea{\*\bkmkend _B0009005e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009005f}when{\*\bkmkend _B0009005f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090060}they{\*\bkmkend _B00090060} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090061}will{\*\bkmkend _B00090061} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090062}get{\*\bkmkend _B00090062} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090063}to{\*\bkmkend _B00090063} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090064}our{\*\bkmkend _B00090064} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090065}place
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090066}{\*\bkmkend _B00090065}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090066} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090067}Over{\*\bkmkend _B00090067} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090068}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090068} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090069}last{\*\bkmkend _B00090069} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009006a
}five{\*\bkmkend _B0009006a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009006b}or{\*\bkmkend _B0009006b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009006c}six{\*\bkmkend _B0009006c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009006d}years{\*\bkmkstart _B0009006e}{\*\bkmkend _B0009006d},{\*\bkmkend _B0009006e} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0009006f}it's{\*\bkmkend _B0009006f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090070}just{\*\bkmkend _B00090070} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090071}seems{\*\bkmkend _B00090071} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090072}to{\*\bkmkend _B00090072} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090073}be
{\*\bkmkend _B00090073} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090074}one{\*\bkmkend _B00090074} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090075}disaster{\*\bkmkend _B00090075} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090076}after{\*\bkmkend _B00090076} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090077}another{\*\bkmkstart _B00090078}
{\*\bkmkend _B00090077}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090078} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090079}It{\*\bkmkend _B00090079} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009007a}was{\*\bkmkend _B0009007a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009007b}good{\*\bkmkend _B0009007b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009007c}to{\*\bkmkend _B0009007c} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0009007d}hear{\*\bkmkend _B0009007d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009007e}Prince{\*\bkmkend _B0009007e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009007f}Charles{\*\bkmkend _B0009007f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090080}speaking{\*\bkmkend _B00090080} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090081}up
{\*\bkmkend _B00090081} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090082}for{\*\bkmkend _B00090082} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090083}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090083} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090084}farmers{\*\bkmkend _B00090084} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090085}at{\*\bkmkend _B00090085} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00090086}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090086} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090087}Royal{\*\bkmkend _B00090087} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090088}show{\*\bkmkstart _B00090089}{\*\bkmkend _B00090088}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090089} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009008a}He
{\*\bkmkend _B0009008a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009008b}seems{\*\bkmkend _B0009008b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009008c}to{\*\bkmkend _B0009008c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009008d}have{\*\bkmkend _B0009008d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0009008e}more{\*\bkmkend _B0009008e} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0009008f}idea{\*\bkmkend _B0009008f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090090}about{\*\bkmkend _B00090090} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090091}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090091} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090092}problems{\*\bkmkend _B00090092} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090093}of
{\*\bkmkend _B00090093} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090094}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090094} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090095}countryside{\*\bkmkend _B00090095} than {\*\bkmkstart _B00090097}the{\*\bkmkend _B00090097} {\*\bkmkstart _B00090098}government{\*\bkmkstart _B00090099}
{\*\bkmkend _B00090098}.{\*\bkmkend _B00090099}
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  30  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\pararsid3609558 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 \cell }\pard 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 \trowd \irow0\irowband0\lastrow \ts11\trgaph108\trleft0\trkeep\trftsWidth1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrtbl \clbrdrl
\brdrtbl \clbrdrb\brdrtbl \clbrdrr\brdrtbl \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth8550\clshdrawnil \cellx8550\row }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 July {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0001}a
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0001} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0002}slight{\*\bkmkend _B000f0002} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0003}improvement{\*\bkmkend _B000f0003} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0004}in{\*\bkmkend _B000f0004} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0005}the{\*\bkmkend _B000f0005} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0006}weather{\*\bkmkend _B000f0006} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0007}this{\*\bkmkend _B000f0007} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0008}week{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0009}{\*\bkmkend _B000f0008}.{\*\bkmkend _B000f0009} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f000a}Have
{\*\bkmkend _B000f000a} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f000b}been{\*\bkmkend _B000f000b} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f000c}trying{\*\bkmkend _B000f000c} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f000d}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f000d} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f000e}get{\*\bkmkend _B000f000e} the sheep c
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0011}lippers{\*\bkmkend _B000f0011} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0012}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f0012} come but {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0015}they{\*\bkmkend _B000f0015} say that they are that {\*\bkmkstart _B000f001b}far{\*\bkmkend _B000f001b} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f001c}behind{\*\bkmkend _B000f001c} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f001d}that{\*\bkmkend _B000f001d} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f001e}it{\*\bkmkend _B000f001e} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f001f}will{\*\bkmkend _B000f001f} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0020}be
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0020} {\*\bkmkstart _B00110001}at{\*\bkmkend _B00110001} {\*\bkmkstart _B00110002}least{\*\bkmkend _B00110002} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0022}another{\*\bkmkend _B000f0022} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0023}week{\*\bkmkend _B000f0023} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0024}before{\*\bkmkend _B000f0024} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0025}they{\*\bkmkend _B000f0025} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0026}will{\*\bkmkend _B000f0026} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0027}be{\*\bkmkend _B000f0027} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0028}here
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0029}{\*\bkmkend _B000f0028}.{\*\bkmkend _B000f0029} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f002a}We{\*\bkmkend _B000f002a} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f002b}decided{\*\bkmkend _B000f002b} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f002c}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f002c} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f002d
}cut{\*\bkmkend _B000f002d} all {\*\bkmkstart _B000f002f}the{\*\bkmkend _B000f002f} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0030}hay{\*\bkmkend _B000f0030} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0031}and{\*\bkmkend _B000f0031} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0032}hope{\*\bkmkend _B000f0032} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0033}that{\*\bkmkend _B000f0033} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0034}we{\*\bkmkend _B000f0034} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0035}would{\*\bkmkend _B000f0035} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0036}get{\*\bkmkend _B000f0036} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0037}a
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0037} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0038}good{\*\bkmkend _B000f0038} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0039}week{\*\bkmkend _B000f0039} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f003a}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f003a} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f003b}get{\*\bkmkend _B000f003b} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f003c}it{\*\bkmkstart _B000f003d}{\*\bkmkend _B000f003c}.{\*\bkmkstart _B000f003e}{\*\bkmkend _B000f003d}
\par {\*\bkmkend _B000f003e}DEFRA {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0041}are{\*\bkmkend _B000f0041} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0042}refusing{\*\bkmkend _B000f0042} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0043}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f0043} lift the twenty day {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0049}standstill
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0049} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f004a}will{\*\bkmkend _B000f004a} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f004b}rule{\*\bkmkstart _B000f004c}{\*\bkmkend _B000f004b}.{\*\bkmkend _B000f004c} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f004d}It{\*\bkmkend _B000f004d} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f004e}
is{\*\bkmkend _B000f004e} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f004f}going{\*\bkmkend _B000f004f} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0050}to{\*\bkmkend _B000f0050} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0051}cause{\*\bkmkend _B000f0051} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0052}a{\*\bkmkend _B000f0052} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0053}lot{\*\bkmkend _B000f0053} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0054}of{\*\bkmkend _B000f0054} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0055}problems{\*\bkmkend _B000f0055} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0056}in{\*\bkmkend _B000f0056} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0057}a
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0057} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0058}month{\*\bkmkend _B000f0058} or two\rquote s {\*\bkmkstart _B000f005b}time{\*\bkmkend _B000f005b} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f005c}when{\*\bkmkend _B000f005c} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f005d}most{\*\bkmkend _B000f005d} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B000f005e}of{\*\bkmkend _B000f005e} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f005f}the{\*\bkmkend _B000f005f} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0060}sales{\*\bkmkend _B000f0060} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0061}take{\*\bkmkend _B000f0061} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0062}place
{\*\bkmkend _B000f0062} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0063}before{\*\bkmkend _B000f0063} {\*\bkmkstart _B000f0064}winter{\*\bkmkstart _B000f0065}{\*\bkmkend _B000f0064}.{\*\bkmkend _B000f0065}
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 WEEK  31  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid2128203 {\*\bkmkstart _B00130001}July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid15084715 A{\*\bkmkend _B00130001} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130002}much{\*\bkmkend _B00130002} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130003}better{\*\bkmkend _B00130003} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130004}week{\*\bkmkstart _B00130005}{\*\bkmkend _B00130004},
{\*\bkmkend _B00130005} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130006}we{\*\bkmkend _B00130006} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130007}got{\*\bkmkend _B00130007} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130008}the{\*\bkmkend _B00130008} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130009}sheep{\*\bkmkend _B00130009} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0013000a}clipped{\*\bkmkend _B0013000a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013000b}and{\*\bkmkend _B0013000b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013000c}the{\*\bkmkend _B0013000c} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130010}hay baled.{\*\bkmkend _B00130010} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130011}What
{\*\bkmkend _B00130011} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130012}a{\*\bkmkend _B00130012} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130013}difference{\*\bkmkend _B00130013} a {\*\bkmkstart _B00130015}few{\*\bkmkend _B00130015} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130016}sunny{\*\bkmkend _B00130016} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130017}days{\*\bkmkend _B00130017} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130018}make{\*\bkmkstart _B00130019}{\*\bkmkend _B00130018}.{\*\bkmkend _B00130019} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001a}We{\*\bkmkend _B0013001a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001b}are
{\*\bkmkend _B0013001b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001c}just{\*\bkmkend _B0013001c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001d}a{\*\bkmkend _B0013001d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001e}few{\*\bkmkend _B0013001e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013001f}days{\*\bkmkend _B0013001f} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130020}from{\*\bkmkend _B00130020} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130021}starting{\*\bkmkend _B00130021} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130022}to{\*\bkmkend _B00130022} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130023}cut{\*\bkmkend _B00130023} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130024}barley
{\*\bkmkend _B00130024} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130025}and{\*\bkmkend _B00130025} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130026}the{\*\bkmkend _B00130026} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130027}rain{\*\bkmkend _B00130027} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130028}has{\*\bkmkend _B00130028} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130029}started{\*\bkmkend _B00130029} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013002a}to{\*\bkmkend _B0013002a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013002b}fall{\*\bkmkend _B0013002b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013002c}again{\*\bkmkstart _B0013002d}{\*\bkmkend _B0013002c}.
{\*\bkmkend _B0013002d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013002e}Back{\*\bkmkend _B0013002e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013002f}to{\*\bkmkend _B0013002f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130030}square{\*\bkmkend _B00130030} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130031}one{\*\bkmkstart _B00130032}
{\*\bkmkend _B00130031}.{\*\bkmkstart _B00130033}{\*\bkmkend _B00130032}
\par {\*\bkmkstart _B00130034}{\*\bkmkend _B00130033}Everybody{\*\bkmkend _B00130034} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130035}is{\*\bkmkend _B00130035} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130036}up{\*\bkmkend _B00130036} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130037}in{\*\bkmkend _B00130037} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130038}arms{\*\bkmkend _B00130038} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130039}about{\*\bkmkend _B00130039} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013003a}this{\*\bkmkend _B0013003a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013003b}20{\*\bkmkend _B0013003b} day rule {\*\bkmkstart _B0013003e}not
{\*\bkmkend _B0013003e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013003f}being{\*\bkmkend _B0013003f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130040}lifted{\*\bkmkstart _B00130041}{\*\bkmkend _B00130040}.{\*\bkmkend _B00130041} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130042}The{\*\bkmkend _B00130042} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130043}country{\*\bkmkend _B00130043} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130044}is{\*\bkmkend _B00130044} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130045}free{\*\bkmkend _B00130045} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130046}from{\*\bkmkend _B00130046} F&M {\*\bkmkstart _B0013004b}so
{\*\bkmkend _B0013004b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013004c}the{\*\bkmkend _B0013004c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013004d}government{\*\bkmkend _B0013004d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013004e}could{\*\bkmkend _B0013004e} drop it {\*\bkmkstart _B00130050}to{\*\bkmkend _B00130050} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130051}six{\*\bkmkend _B00130051} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130052}days{\*\bkmkend _B00130052} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130053}and{\*\bkmkend _B00130053} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130054}it{\*\bkmkend _B00130054} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130055}would
{\*\bkmkend _B00130055} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130056}still{\*\bkmkend _B00130056} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130057}have{\*\bkmkend _B00130057} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130058}plenty{\*\bkmkend _B00130058} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130059}of{\*\bkmkend _B00130059} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0013005a}control{\*\bkmkend _B0013005a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013005b}of{\*\bkmkend _B0013005b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013005c}animals{\*\bkmkstart _B0013005d}{\*\bkmkend _B0013005c}.{\*\bkmkend _B0013005d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013005e}Talking
{\*\bkmkend _B0013005e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013005f}to{\*\bkmkend _B0013005f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130061}an auctioneer{\*\bkmkend _B00130061} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130062}the{\*\bkmkend _B00130062} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130063}other{\*\bkmkend _B00130063} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130064}day{\*\bkmkend _B00130064} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130065}he{\*\bkmkend _B00130065} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130066}reckons{\*\bkmkend _B00130066} if it isn\rquote t {\*\bkmkstart _B0013006a}relaxed{\*\bkmkend _B0013006a} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0013006b}this{\*\bkmkend _B0013006b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013006c}autumn{\*\bkmkend _B0013006c} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013006d}the{\*\bkmkend _B0013006d} auctions {\*\bkmkstart _B00130070}might{\*\bkmkend _B00130070} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130071}as
{\*\bkmkend _B00130071} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130072}well{\*\bkmkend _B00130072} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130073}close{\*\bkmkstart _B00130074}{\*\bkmkend _B00130073},{\*\bkmkend _B00130074} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130075}because{\*\bkmkend _B00130075} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130076}most{\*\bkmkend _B00130076} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130077}of{\*\bkmkend _B00130077} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130078}them{\*\bkmkend _B00130078} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130079}are{\*\bkmkend _B00130079} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013007a}losing
{\*\bkmkend _B0013007a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013007b}money{\*\bkmkend _B0013007b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013007c}anyway{\*\bkmkstart _B0013007d}{\*\bkmkend _B0013007c}.{\*\bkmkend _B0013007d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013007e}We{\*\bkmkend _B0013007e} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B0013007f}are{\*\bkmkend _B0013007f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130080}still{\*\bkmkend _B00130080} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130081}sending{\*\bkmkend _B00130081} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130082}our{\*\bkmkend _B00130082} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130083}cattle
{\*\bkmkend _B00130083} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130084}and{\*\bkmkend _B00130084} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130085}sheep{\*\bkmkend _B00130085} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130086}direct{\*\bkmkstart _B00130087}{\*\bkmkend _B00130086},{\*\bkmkend _B00130087} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130088}but{\*\bkmkend _B00130088} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130089}the{\*\bkmkend _B00130089} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008a}prices{\*\bkmkend _B0013008a} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008b}we receive{\*\bkmkend _B0013008b} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008c}a
{\*\bkmkend _B0013008c}re {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008d}a{\*\bkmkend _B0013008d} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008e}long{\*\bkmkend _B0013008e} {\*\bkmkstart _B0013008f}way{\*\bkmkend _B0013008f} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130090}short{\*\bkmkend _B00130090} 
{\*\bkmkstart _B00130091}of{\*\bkmkend _B00130091} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130092}what{\*\bkmkend _B00130092} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130093}they{\*\bkmkend _B00130093} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130094}should{\*\bkmkend _B00130094} {\*\bkmkstart _B00130095}be
{\*\bkmkend _B00130095}.
\par 
\par Week 32
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid2128203 {\fs24\insrsid15084715   
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 The big news this week is the announcement of the closure o
f Penrith market. It is quite obvious that all the auction marts in Cumbria must be under severe pressure after the F and M  disaster. The only people who will be pleased hear this news will be the top brass at DEFRA. They have made no secret that they wo
u
ld like to see all the auctions closed. Well if this happens, then it will be goodbye to a lot of farmers. We've been selling prime stock direct to the abattoirs and all I can say that it is the road to nowhere. The weather doesn't get any better. Some fa
rmers up the country}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn 
}{\insrsid15084715  farms to the north of the respondent are on deep, damp peaty soil and conditions were very bad in the summer 2002}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
 are in dire straits. Most of them have neither hay or silage. With most of the stock indoors it must be costing them a fortune for feed. \line 
\par Week 33
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
Started harvest this week, but it has been a stop - go job. The biggest job is getting the combine to travel as the ground is absolutely bottomless. And have never seen the land as wet since 1985. I have spoken to a few farmers 
further up the country and they\rquote 
re on the verge of giving up. They can hardly believe after the disaster of F and M last year it would be followed by this weather this year. This seems to be a lot of angry farmers around Penrith, the way the closure of the
 market was announced. I think they should have called a meeting with the farmers first and explained the difficulties they were in.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par Week 34
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
The government is not prepared to move very much on the 20 day rule. I can't understand what it is in aid of. The 
country has been clear F&M for months now. Why can't it be reduced to six days, and all bought-in stock keeped on their own? I don't how some farmers will cope as autumn is the peak period for trading. The weather doesn't get much better, harvest is very 
s
low, and the barley is getting blacker by the day. We are fairly lucky as one near neighbour has not got his first cut silage yet. His cows have been inside for most of the summer and he has been buying in fodder for them for the last two months, he recko
ns he could be out of business by November. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 35
\par Finished cutting barley this week although most of the straw is still lying in the fields. The ground is that wet that it is doubtful whether we will never get it. Most farmers further up the country are
 still struggling to make hay and silage. Most of them think that if they don't get it by the end of August they will never get any. The only bright spot in farming at the minute is the price of lambs. The buyers reckon that they are very scarce this year
. It is little wonder the number of breeding sheep that was culled in 2001. Long keep lambs in the north of Scotland are up by about \'a3
10 on the year. A lot of farmers in this area said that they wouldn't go back into sheep, but I think they will be the most profitable enterprise there is.
\par 
\par Week 36
\par The weather is still the big problem this week. We get about 4 dry days then the heavens open. We are still waiting to start the spring barley but the ground is that wet, I don't think the combine would travel. We 
have very little to complain about, as there are a lot of farmers still struggling to get hay and silage. It has been an uphill struggle to get stock sold lately with the 20th day standstill in operation we have been taking stock to Wigton and Carlisle as
 
they have dedicated markets, which means that you have to sell them and can't take them home if they make a poor price. I don't know how much longer these restrictions are going to last, but we are getting sick and tired of it all. I thought we lived in a
 free country?\line \line Week 37
\par Started cutting spring barley this week, but got only half a day at it before the rain came down. The weather this year is causing just about as much heartache as the F and M did last year.  The good news this week is that Longtown a
uction is starting a dedicated auction once a fortnight. You don't come under the 20 day restrictions as long as you sell the animals. DEFRA have relaxed some of the rules concerning sheep movements, but most farmers think it is a complete farce the way t
hey are going about it. The ministry vets seem to be giving advice that covers themselves without thinking about the farmers.\line \line Week 38
\par Finished cutting barley this week. The weather has improved a lot, but the ground is still very wet. The yields are very p
oor this year, there has been too much rain and not enough sunshine. We will have to buy a lot of barley this year so it will not help the bank balance. I read that DEFRA are starting a buy-up scheme for sheep quota. They certainly don't want anybody keep
ing sheep after F and M. I don't think it will be very successful as sheep are just about the most profitable enterprise at the moment. DEFRA have sent out new forms to fill in when selling sheep. It must be costing the country a fortune in red tape\line 
\line Week 39
\par I have just watched Countryfile on the TV. The whole program about illegal meat coming into the country. I think it is a disgrace that very little is being done about it, while we are hassled with forms to fill in, trailers to wash and disinfect. Lord Wh
itty says there is warning signs up at all airports, but nobody knows where they are. He looked a complete fool trying to make excuses about the whole affair. The experts reckon it is just a matter of time before there is another outbreak F and M or somet
hing else if nothing is done to stop it
\par 
\par Week 40
\par Summer has arrived at last. The last week has been the best weather of the summer. Most farmers' round about seem to be trying to get some dry silage. It will be wanted as they have been using most of the stu
ff they got earlier in the summer. The back-end stock sales are in full swing now. A lot different to last year when everything was at a standstill. Stock seems to be a very good trade, with sheep making a big comeback. Most farmers selling in the store r
ings are not pleased about the 20 day standstill. I'd think it is a disaster for the ones who buy and sell most weeks. The only way to get round it is to have two holding numbers, if you are lucky.\line \line Week 41
\par Summer is still with us, it is getting warmer  if 
anything. Have been helping neighbour to get some late second cut silage. The quality is not too bad but the ground is still very wet in places. We have been selling quite a few cattle and sheep lately. We have to sell in dedicated auctions so that we don
'
t fall into the 20 day movement ban. Sheep prices are holding up well, and there seems to be large numbers getting sold at Longtown. You would wonder where they were all coming from after last year's clean out. I see DEFRA are bringing in a buy-up scheme 
for sheep quota but the price doesn't seem to be very exciting\line \line Week 42 
\par The weather is still a great and a lot of farmers are still busy getting some late silage. We have been busy putting winter barley in, we hope it will yield a lot better than last year
. Have been reading the report on FMD about Cumbria. Not many surprises in it, but it pointed out how slow DEFRA was in getting things moving. They were obviously very short in manpower. We have a farm close by that has not stocked up yet he usually feeds
 about 300 cattle but the prices he's going to have to pay for them he doesn't think he can make any money at it.
\par 
\par Week 43
\par Much colder this week and the rain came this weekend, it never stopped for 24 hours. We've been buying tups this week, they are in very short supply this year, and are very expensive. We are up to 500 ewes this year, but we have a quota for over 900, so w
e
 have a long way to go to get up to that number. The 20 day standstill rule is still giving problems. We have a few cows and calves to sell, but we are buying in calves most weeks, so that's going to come to a standstill. The government are going to have 
to remove it before long, or most farmers will just ignore it. Even the local vets think it\rquote s a stupid rule.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 44
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
After a wet weekend and weather turned back to summer this week. Although we have had some frosty nights. We have been buying tups this wee
k. There is certainly a shortage of tups the prices they are making. And every farmer seems to be wanting them. We have just got back to about half our usual ewe numbers. We have quota for over 900 but the prices breeding sheep are making, I don't think w
e will get anywhere near that figure. We have a lot more cattle now so the sheep will have to take a back seat.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 45
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
The weather took a turn for the worse this weekend. Sunday night was very wet and cold, it seems to have turned from heatwave to winter 
in a matter of days. I just hope it isn't going to rain for the rest of the winter like last year. We have been doing a lot of work among the sheep these last few days. There seems to be a lot of lameness among them. The vet reckons these things happen wh
en you start a new herd or flock. It seems the F and M outbreak is going to cause problems long after it is gone.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 46
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
We have started one of these 20 day standstills this week. We are selling a heifer and calf at Carlisle in two weeks' time so we can't
 buy anything in until after that. It is the first time we have been on one, and I wouldn't like it to happen too often. I can see why those farmers who buy and sell in the store markets are up in arms about it. There is a lot of talk of some farmers stic
king two fingers up at it as they can't run their businesses. I think a complete standstill of all livestock would be enough if F and M did raise its ugly head again. In the meantime all the forms that is to fill in to move stock should be enough.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 47
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
Putting tups out with the ewes this week. The ground is very wet again and moving sheep around it is very difficult. We have been selling quite a few bulls these last few weeks, but prices have been very poor. With the country only 60% self-sufficient in 
beef you would think it would push the prices up. It seems they can import a lot cheaper. I think it will take a year or two before we can export enough to alter the price. We seem to be the dumping ground for the rest of the world.
\par 
\par Week 48
\par It is a year ag
o this week but we started to restock after the F and M disaster. Time fairly flies by, it is nearly two years since the epidemic started. We have a lot more stock now than we had before, which is a bit surprising as the government were hell-bent on cutti
n
g stock numbers. I don't think anybody want to go back to the numbers they had before. But to make a half-decent living you have to have the numbers. Sheep prices are a lot better this year, but the beef job isn't too hot. With the country 40% short in be
ef meat you would think the prices would be a lot better. It must be cheaper for the meat trade to import it.
\par 
\par Week 49
\par the farming press this weekend that 15,000 people have left the farming industry the since F and M. It is hardly a surprise as the dire st
ate farming is in. What is worse there is a lot less young people coming into the industry. We have a lot of neighbours who have young sons, who are not interested in working seven days a week for peanuts. A lot of older farmers got their eyes opened when
 they had no stock to look after, and not much else to do, and some of them have not restocked yet.
\par 
\par Week 50
\par Very busy week this as }{\fs24\insrsid8144850 [other son]}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  went off to Smithfield Show. Most farmers round here had one of the family away. I suppose with the show every other ye
ar now and the F and M last year, it was a good excuse to have a blow-out. He must have had a good time as he came home skint. The weather doesn't get any better, the ground is very wet. We still have about 50 cattle outside and they are making a right pl
ough up. We are starting to sell more cattle at the moment, so we might get them inside one of these days.
\par 
\par Week 51
\par Had a chat with a friend the other day who had just come back from Canada. He reckons the Government hasn't done much to stop illegal food fr
om coming into the country. When they landed in Canada they had to declare all foodstuffs, even fruit, sniffer dogs were used around their luggage and a big fine if they broke the rules. When he came back to Manchester he never saw a sign or anything else
 for fetching in food. It is little wonder that the country gets FMD and other diseases. The weather has turned dry and cold these last few days let's hope it lasts for a few weeks as the land is just like a bog.
\par 
\par Week 52
\par The weather has been a lot better t
his week. It makes work a lot easier when you can walk about the fields without going up to the knees in slatter. The 20 day Movement rule is still causing a lot of anger around here. A lot of farmers around here are just ignoring it now. They say if they
 
stick to the rules they can't make a living. We have been stuck with it just once and it certainly made things very difficult. Even the local vets think it is silly. I think a six-day rule would be about right. Sheep prices are back on the rise again. We 
still want more breeding sheep to fill quota, but they are going to be very expensive to buy.\line \line Week 53 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 
It is a year ago that I first started writing these diaries, time goes by fast. It is nearly two years since F and M first struck us. Thinking back that 
long it just seems like a bad dream, all those fires burning, ministry officials running about the country, television crews parked up in every lay-by, things are very quiet now. In Longtown we had government ministers there telling us how they were going
 
to help us get back to normal again, promising the shops financial help. I don't think they have ever seen a penny to this day. We have had numerous inquiries about who was to blame, and what should happen in the future if it ever happens again. I think t
he Government is letting it die a natural death and in a years' time it will all be forgotten about.\line \line Week 54 (Christmas week)
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 As it is Christmas
 week not a lot of work done. Most of the time is taken up feeding stock etc. Prices for prime sheep and cattle seem to have gone up these last few weeks. DEFRA have announced that all sheep have to be individually tagged from the spring. What are they go
i
ng to think of next? Selling sheep is turning into a nightmare, with all forms that is to fill-in, and now this. Farms that have come onto the market this back end seemed to be making good prices. A lot of outside buyers are coming into the market buying 
the farmhouse then selling the land off after.
\par 
\par Week 55
\par Happy New Year everybody let's hope it is better than last year at least the weather. F and M seems to be fading into the distant past, the only thing that reminds me of it is all forms that is to fill
-in and the trailers to wash out and disinfect. We could do with better prices for stock, as they are at about the same as they were 10 years ago. Can you buy a new car for the same money as you could 10 years ago? Reports in the farming press say that 15
,000 have left the land since F and M. That should tell the government something. Most farmers just plod on thinking something better will turn up.
\par 
\par Week 56
\par This week has been very cold with hard frosts at night. Most of the days have been taken up with tha
wing water pipes. The weather seems to go from one extreme to another. This kind of weather is not ideal for cattle most of ours are coughing with runny noses. Cattle and sheep prices have been fairly good this last week for two. Often after Christmas and
 New Year prices go flat but the end of January could be the big test when credit cards are paid off. The meat trade reckons the country is short of beef and lamb, so let's hope prices are on the up from now on
\par 
\par Week 57
\par The farming press this weekend thinks
 the government will relax the 21 day rule next week. It predicts it will drop it to a six-day standstill. It will be a lot better to work with although I think it should be scrapped altogether. The government can easily bring in an instant ban if F and M
 broke out again. It is a wonder anybody bothers with sheep the amount of paperwork there is with them. If you want to move them 200 yards on to a neighbour\rquote 
s field you have three forms to fill in. The red tape involved with farming is getting beyond a joke.
\par 
\par Week 58
\par Trying to find more ewes for our quota. This year we must have at least 70 % of our quota or DEFRA will cut our quota. After the F and M cull sheep are very scarce in Cumbria and Scotland and very expensive. The local auction are trying to find 
us some from the north of Scotland but they are very expensive before you get them hauled down here. The price of fat lambs have been very high which is making breeding ewes very expensive. A lot of farmers didn't go back into sheep after the F and M, but
 a lot of them wish they had now that prices have rocketed.
\par 
\par Week 59
\par We have been selling a lot of cattle these last few weeks but the trade has been up and down. If one or two buyers don't turn up at the auction you can easily lose two or three hundred pou
nds on half-a-dozen animals. There seems to be a lot of beef being imported from South America and Ireland at the present time. The supermarkets don't care where they get it from as long as the price is right. Farmers on the Continent would not put up wit
h it, but British farmers just seemed to put up with it. A lot of it is cut up and packed as British beef which can't be right. 
\par 
\par Week 60
\par Winter has arrived this week. We have had a good six inches of snow this last day also. The stock eat a lot more fodder
 when the snow lies about for a week we have had a lot of bother with frozen pipes, as there were some very hard frosts. We had 150 ewe lambs delivered from Perthshire this week so we have got up to our 70 per cent of our quota filled. We don't start lamb
ing until April, so we are hoping the weather will be as good as last year. As all the sheds are full of cattle we have to lamb them outside and good weather is half the battle.
\par 
\par Week 61
\par Reform of the CAP is the big talking point at the moment. If Mrs Becke
tt gets her way farmers will get a single payment from Europe and will be free to farm any way they like. It will be a good idea if the payment is big enough and the prices don't collapse for meat and cereals. I suppose it will be France and Germany who d
ecides what will happen in the end. The weather has taken a turn for the better this week, and the ground is drying out fast. The winter barley crops are looking really well so let's hope for a good summer.\line \line Week 62
\par Another dry week but had some very frosty
 nights. We had to dip about 300 sheep this week as they were showing signs of scab. They were bought in late last year and had obviously not been dipped. Scab is the biggest health problem among sheep now. It spreads very easily through auctions, cattle 
wagons etc. I think DEFRA should fetch mandatory dipping back again. It is two years since F and M broke out, the time passes very quickly. I don't think about it much now the only when somebody else mentions it.
\par 
\par  }{\fs24\insrsid2033949 
\par \page }{\fs24\insrsid15084715 Week 63
\par The 20 day standstill is reduced t
o 6 this weekend. It will take a lot of pressure off farmers who buy and sell every week. The auction companies are not very happy with the new arrangements as they are not allowed to keep stock on the premises overnight. It will hit the big pedigree sale
s}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715 
 For pedigree sales stock is sometimes moved to an auction some distance from home and buyers come from all over the country. Sometimes an overnight stay may be needed while transport is arranged.}}}{\fs24\insrsid15084715 
 etc. The weather is still good and it feels as though spring is just around the corner. It is two years this weekend that we got the F and M. Nobody in house has mentioned it, so it must be fading into the past.
\par 
\par Week 64
\par The weather is still dry and sunn
y. Let's hope it lasts until the end of April when we should be well through the lambing. We have been moving the ewes into smaller lots, as we lamb outside now. All the sheds are full of young bulls. We have about 200 bulls at the minute. They don't make
 
a lot when you sell them, but there is quite a bit of subsidy on them so it makes them worth rearing. Fat sheep are getting dearer every week. The F and M cull plus the rise of the Euro are making them more exportable. Reports in the farming press say tha
t spring lambs in France are making between \'a390 and \'a3100 apiece. I wonder if we will ever see these prices?
\par 
\par Week 65
\par The week has been warm and sunny through the day, but very cold at nights. With some very sharp frosts. Our fields look like a desert with t
he grass burnt brown with the frosts. We had a few ewes lambed this week. We didn't expect them this early but the way the weather is they are doing well. A lot of farmers are very concerned about the decoupling of farm subsidies. The government would lik
e to make one single payment, as long as we do as we are told. I think we will be a lot worse off if it comes into operation.
\par 
\par Week 66
\par The weather is that cold and the ground that dry, we got the contractor in to start and plough. A day later they fetched t
he drill so we have ploughed and drilled 60 acres of barley in just over two days. It must be 20 years since we had crop sown in March.\line 
The lambing is going very slowly, I suppose the weather is too dry, we just need a good wet night and they will all star
t and lamb. The main news at the moment is the war in Iraq. I think the people in the US have very short memories, it could turn into another Vietnam.
\par 
\par Week 67
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1104}Another{\*\bkmkend _VV1104} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1105}dry{\*\bkmkend _VV1105} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1106}sunny{\*\bkmkend _VV1106} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1107}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV1108M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1107},{\*\bkmkend _VV1108M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1109}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1109} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1110}had{\*\bkmkend _VV1110} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1111}some{\*\bkmkend _VV1111} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1112}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1112} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1113}hard{\*\bkmkend _VV1113} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1114}
frosts{\*\bkmkstart _VV1115M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1114}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1115M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1116}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1116} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1117}spring{\*\bkmkend _VV1117} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1118}barley{\*\bkmkend _VV1118} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1119}is
{\*\bkmkend _VV1119} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1120}just{\*\bkmkend _VV1120} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1121}showing{\*\bkmkend _VV1121} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1122}through{\*\bkmkstart _VV1123M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1122},{\*\bkmkend _VV1123M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1124}but
{\*\bkmkend _VV1124} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1125}things{\*\bkmkend _VV1125} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1126}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1126} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1127}do{\*\bkmkend _VV1127} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1128}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1128} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1129}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1129} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1130}shower{\*\bkmkend _VV1130} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1131}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1131} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1132}rain{\*\bkmkend _VV1132} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1133}just{\*\bkmkend _VV1133} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1134}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1134} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1135}
freshen{\*\bkmkend _VV1135} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1136}them{\*\bkmkend _VV1136} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1137}up{\*\bkmkstart _VV1138M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1137}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1138M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1139}Cut{\*\bkmkend _VV1139} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1140}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1140
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1141}law{\*\bkmkend _VV1141}n {\*\bkmkstart _VV1143}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1143} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1144}other{\*\bkmkend _VV1144} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1145}day{\*\bkmkstart _VV1146M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1145},{\*\bkmkend _VV1146M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1147
}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1147} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1148}earliest{\*\bkmkend _VV1148} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1149}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1149} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1150}can{\*\bkmkend _VV1150} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1151}remember{\*\bkmkstart _VV1152M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1151}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1152M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1153}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1153} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1154}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV1154} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1155}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1155} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1156}going{\*\bkmkend _VV1156} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1157}along
{\*\bkmkend _VV1157} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1158}slowly{\*\bkmkstart _VV1159M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1158},{\*\bkmkend _VV1159M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1160}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1160} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1161}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1161} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1162}can't{\*\bkmkend _VV1162} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1163}complain{\*\bkmkend _VV1163} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1164}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1164} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1165}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1165} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1166}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1166} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1167}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1167} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1168}
easiest{\*\bkmkend _VV1168} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1169}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1169} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1170}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1170} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1171}ever{\*\bkmkend _VV1171} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1172}had{\*\bkmkstart _VV1173M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1172}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1173M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1174}Things{\*\bkmkend _VV1174} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1175}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1175} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1176}getting{\*\bkmkend _VV1176} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1177}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1177} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1178}bit{\*\bkmkend _VV1178
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1179}hectic{\*\bkmkend _VV1179} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1180}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1180} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1181}house{\*\bkmkend _VV1181} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1182}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1182} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1183}our{\*\bkmkend _VV1183} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1184}older{\*\bkmkend _VV1184} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1185}son{\*\bkmkend _VV1185} }{\fs24\insrsid8144850 [son]}{\fs24\insrsid15084715  {\*\bkmkstart _VV1187}gets{\*\bkmkend _VV1187} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1188}married{\*\bkmkend _VV1188} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1189}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1189} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1194M}12th April{\*\bkmkstart _VV1195M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1194M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1195M} The house {\*\bkmkstart _VV1198}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV1198} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1199}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1199} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1200}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1200} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1201}full{\*\bkmkend _VV1201} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1202}every{\*\bkmkend _VV1202} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1203}night{\*\bkmkend _VV1203} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1204}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1204} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1205}friends{\*\bkmkend _VV1205} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1206}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1206} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1207}neighbours{\*\bkmkend _VV1207} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1208}bringing{\*\bkmkend _VV1208} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1209}presents{\*\bkmkstart _VV1210M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1209}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1210M}
\par 
\par Week 68
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1211}A{\*\bkmkend _VV1211} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1212}very
{\*\bkmkend _VV1212} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1213}busy{\*\bkmkend _VV1213} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1214}week{\*\bkmkend _VV1214} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1215}ended{\*\bkmkend _VV1215} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1216}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1216} }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8144850 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1217}[son]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 's{\*\bkmkend _VV1217} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1218}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV1218} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1219}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1219} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1220}Saturday{\*\bkmkstart _VV1221M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1220}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1221M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1222}It{\*\bkmkend _VV1222} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1223}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1223} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1224}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1224} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1225}long{\*\bkmkend _VV1225} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1226}hard{\*\bkmkend _VV1226} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1227}day{\*\bkmkstart _VV1228M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1227},{\*\bkmkend _VV1228M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1229}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1229} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1257}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1257} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1258}were{\*\bkmkend _VV1258} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1259}up
{\*\bkmkend _VV1259} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1232}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1232} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1233}5am{\*\bkmkend _VV1233} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1234}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1234} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1235}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1235} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1236}morning{\*\bkmkstart _VV1237M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1236}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1237M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1238}Trying{\*\bkmkend _VV1238} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1239}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1239} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1240}get{\*\bkmkend _VV1240} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1241}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV1241} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1242}
and{\*\bkmkend _VV1242} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1243}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV1243} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1244}fed{\*\bkmkend _VV1244} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1245}twice{\*\bkmkend _VV1245} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1246}before{\*\bkmkend _VV1246} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1247}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV1247} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1248}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV1248} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1249}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1249} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1263M}12:{\*\bkmkend _VV1263M}mid-day{\*\bkmkstart _VV1267M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1267M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1268}There
{\*\bkmkend _VV1268} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1269}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1269} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1270}quite{\*\bkmkend _VV1270} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1271}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1271} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1272}bit{\*\bkmkend _VV1272} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1273}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1273} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1274}travelling{\*\bkmkend _VV1274} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1275}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1275} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1276}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1276} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1277}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV1277} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1278}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1278} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1279}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1279} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1280}Lanercost{\*\bkmkend _VV1280} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1281}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1281} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1282}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1282} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1283}reception{\*\bkmkend _VV1283} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1284}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1284} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1285}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1285} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1286}White{\*\bkmkend _VV1286} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1287}Heather{\*\bkmkend _VV1287} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1288}Kirkbride{\*\bkmkstart _VV1289M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1288}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1289M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1290}Everybody{\*\bkmkend _VV1290} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1291}seemed{\*\bkmkend _VV1291} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1292}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1292} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1293}enjoy{\*\bkmkend _VV1293} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1294}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1294} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1295}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1295} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1296}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1296} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1297}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV1297} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1298}made{\*\bkmkend _VV1298} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1299
}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1299} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1300}day{\*\bkmkstart _VV1301M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1300}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1301M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1302}There{\*\bkmkend _VV1302} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1303}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1303} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1304}no{\*\bkmkend _VV1304} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1305}disasters{\*\bkmkend _VV1305} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1306}when{\*\bkmkend _VV1306} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1307}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1307} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1308}got{\*\bkmkend _VV1308} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1309}up{\*\bkmkend _VV1309} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1310}late{\*\bkmkend _VV1310} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1311}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1311} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1312}Sunday{\*\bkmkend _VV1312} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1313}morning{\*\bkmkend _VV1313} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1314}which{\*\bkmkend _VV1314} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1315}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1315} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1316}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1316} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1317}relief{\*\bkmkend _VV1317} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1318}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1318} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1319}something{\*\bkmkend _VV1319} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1320}usually{\*\bkmkend _VV1320} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1321}goes{\*\bkmkend _VV1321} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1322}wrong{\*\bkmkend _VV1322} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1323}when{\*\bkmkend _VV1323} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1324}you{\*\bkmkend _VV1324} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1325}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV1325} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1326}want{\*\bkmkend _VV1326} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1327}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1327} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1328}to{\*\bkmkstart _VV1329M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1328}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1329M} 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1331}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1331} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1334M}69{\*\bkmkend _VV1334M}  
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1336}Back{\*\bkmkend _VV1336} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1337}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1337} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1338}normal{\*\bkmkend _VV1338} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1339}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1339} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1340}week{\*\bkmkend _VV1340} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1341}after{\*\bkmkend _VV1341} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1342}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1342} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1343}we{\*\bkmkstart _VV1363}dding{\*\bkmkstart _VV1344M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1343}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1344M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1345}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1345
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1346}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV1346} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1347}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1347} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1348}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1348} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1349}good{\*\bkmkend _VV1349} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1350}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1350} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1351}ever{\*\bkmkstart _VV1352M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1351}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1352M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1353}In{\*\bkmkend _VV1353} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1354}fact{\*\bkmkend _VV1354} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1355}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1355} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1356}has
{\*\bkmkend _VV1356} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1357}got{\*\bkmkend _VV1357} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1358}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1358} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1359}hot{\*\bkmkend _VV1359} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1360}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1360} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1361}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV1362M
}{\*\bkmkend _VV1361}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1362M} Our{\*\bkmkend _VV1363} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1364}fields{\*\bkmkend _VV1364} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1365}look{\*\bkmkend _VV1365} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1366}like{\*\bkmkend _VV1366} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1367}deserts
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1368M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1367},{\*\bkmkend _VV1368M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1369}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1369} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1370}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1370} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1371}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1371} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1372}need{\*\bkmkend _VV1372} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1373}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1373} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1374}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1374} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1375}good{\*\bkmkend _VV1375} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1376}soaking{\*\bkmkstart _VV1377M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1376}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1377M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1378}I
{\*\bkmkend _VV1378} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1379}suppose{\*\bkmkend _VV1379} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1380}when{\*\bkmkend _VV1380} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1381}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1381} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1382}starts{\*\bkmkend _VV1382} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1383}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1383
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1384}rain{\*\bkmkend _VV1384} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1385}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1385} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1386}will{\*\bkmkend _VV1386} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1387}never{\*\bkmkend _VV1387} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1388}stop{\*\bkmkstart _VV1389M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1388}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1389M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1390}There{\*\bkmkend _VV1390} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1391}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1391} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1392}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1392} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1393}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV1393} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1394}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV1394} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1395}concern{\*\bkmkend _VV1395} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1396}about{\*\bkmkend _VV1396} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1397}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1397} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1398}mid-term{\*\bkmkend _VV1398} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1399}review
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1400M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1399}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1400M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1401}Some{\*\bkmkend _VV1401} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1402}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV1402} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1403}think{\*\bkmkend _VV1403} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1404}they
{\*\bkmkend _VV1404} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1405}will{\*\bkmkend _VV1405} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1406}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1406} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1407}left{\*\bkmkend _VV1407} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1408}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1408} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1409}no{\*\bkmkend _VV1409} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1410}subsidies{\*\bkmkend _VV1410} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1411}if{\*\bkmkend _VV1411} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1412}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1412} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1413}goes{\*\bkmkend _VV1413} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1414}through{\*\bkmkend _VV1414} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1415}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1415} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1416}planned{\*\bkmkstart _VV1417M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1416}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1417M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1418}Let's{\*\bkmkend _VV1418} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1419}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV1419} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1420}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1420} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1421}France{\*\bkmkend _VV1421} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1422}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1422} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1423}Ireland{\*\bkmkend _VV1423} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1424}throws{\*\bkmkend _VV1424} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1425}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1425} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1426}out{\*\bkmkend _VV1426} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1427}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1427} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1428}their{\*\bkmkend _VV1428} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1429}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV1429} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1430
}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1430} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1431}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1431} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1432}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1432} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1433}against{\*\bkmkend _VV1433} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1434}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV1435M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1434}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1435M}
\par 
\par Week 70
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1437}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1437} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1438}rains{\*\bkmkend _VV1438} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1439}came{\*\bkmkend _VV1439} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1440}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1440} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1441}Friday{\*\bkmkend _VV1441} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1442}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1442} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1443}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1443} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1444}farm{\*\bkmkend _VV1444} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1445}had{\*\bkmkend _VV1445} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1446}greened{\*\bkmkend _VV1446} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1447}up{\*\bkmkend _VV1447} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1448}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1448} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1449}Saturday{\*\bkmkend _VV1449} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1450}morning{\*\bkmkstart _VV1451M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1450}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1451M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1452}It{\*\bkmkend _VV1452} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1453}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1453} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1454}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1454} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1455}welcome{\*\bkmkend _VV1455} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1456}change{\*\bkmkend _VV1456} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1457}
as{\*\bkmkend _VV1457} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1458}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1458} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1459}ewes{\*\bkmkend _VV1459} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1460}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1460} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1461}lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV1461} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1469}were{\*\bkmkend _VV1469
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1463}needing{\*\bkmkend _VV1463} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1464}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1464} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1465}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV1465} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1466}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1466} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1467}feed{\*\bkmkstart _VV1468M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1467
}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1468M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1475}Sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV1475} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1476}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1476} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1477}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1477} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1478}tremendous{\*\bkmkend _VV1478} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1479}trade
{\*\bkmkend _VV1479} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1480}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1480} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1481}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1481} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1482}moment{\*\bkmkstart _VV1483M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1482},{\*\bkmkend _VV1483M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1484}spring{\*\bkmkend _VV1484} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1485}lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV1485} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1486}were{\*\bkmkend _VV1486} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1487}making{\*\bkmkend _VV1487} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1488}over{\*\bkmkend _VV1488} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1492M}\'a3100{\*\bkmkend _VV1492M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1493}apiece{\*\bkmkend _VV1493} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1494}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1494} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1495}Longtown{\*\bkmkend _VV1495} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1496}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1496} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1497}Thursday{\*\bkmkstart _VV1498M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1497}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1498M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1499}We{\*\bkmkend _VV1499} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1500}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1500} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1501}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1501} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1504M}200{\*\bkmkend _VV1504M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1505}
fat{\*\bkmkend _VV1505} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1506}hoggs{\*\bkmkend _VV1506} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1507}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1507} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1508}sell{\*\bkmkstart _VV1509M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1508},{\*\bkmkend _VV1509M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1510}so{\*\bkmkend _VV1510} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1511}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1511} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1512}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1512} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1513}hoping{\*\bkmkend _VV1513} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1514}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1514} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1515}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1515} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1516}
trade{\*\bkmkend _VV1516} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1517}keeps{\*\bkmkend _VV1517} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1518}up{\*\bkmkstart _VV1519M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1518}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1519M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1520}We{\*\bkmkend _VV1520} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1521}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1521}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1522}been{\*\bkmkend _VV1522} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1523}buying{\*\bkmkend _VV1523} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1524}black-and-white{\*\bkmkend _VV1524} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1525}bull{\*\bkmkend _VV1525} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1526}calves{\*\bkmkend _VV1526} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1527}since{\*\bkmkend _VV1527} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1528}F{\*\bkmkend _VV1528} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1530M}{\*\bkmkstart _VV1550}and{\*\bkmkstart _VV1551}{\*\bkmkend _VV1530M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1531}M{\*\bkmkend _VV1531} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1532}but
{\*\bkmkend _VV1532} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1533}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1533} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1534}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1534} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1535}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1535} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1536}worth{\*\bkmkend _VV1536} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1537}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1537} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1538}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV1538} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1539}when{\*\bkmkend _VV1539} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1540}you{\*\bkmkend _VV1540} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1541}come{\*\bkmkend _VV1541} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1542}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1542} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1543}
sell{\*\bkmkend _VV1543} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1544}them{\*\bkmkstart _VV1545M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1544}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1545M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1546}If{\*\bkmkend _VV1546} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1547}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1547} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1548}wasn't{\*\bkmkend _VV1548}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1549}for{\*\bkmkend _VV1549} the{\*\bkmkend _VV1550} bull{\*\bkmkend _VV1551} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1552}subsidy{\*\bkmkend _VV1552} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1553}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1553} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1554}wouldn't{\*\bkmkend _VV1554} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1555}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1555} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1556}worth{\*\bkmkend _VV1556} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1557}bothering{\*\bkmkend _VV1557} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1558}with{\*\bkmkstart _VV1559M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1558}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1559M}
\par 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1566}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1566} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1569M}71{\*\bkmkend _VV1569M}  
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1572}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1572} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1573}rain{\*\bkmkend _VV1573} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1575}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1575} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1576}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1576} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1577}week{\*\bkmkend _VV1577} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1578
}has{\*\bkmkend _VV1578} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1579}changed{\*\bkmkend _VV1579} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1580}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1580} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1581}colour{\*\bkmkend _VV1581} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1582}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1582} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1583}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV1583} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1584}countryside{\*\bkmkstart _VV1585M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1584}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1585M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1586}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1586} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1587}grass{\*\bkmkend _VV1587} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1588}is
{\*\bkmkend _VV1588} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1589}growing{\*\bkmkend _VV1589} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1590}fast{\*\bkmkstart _VV1591M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1590},{\*\bkmkend _VV1591M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1592}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1592} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1593}barley
{\*\bkmkend _VV1593} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1594}crops{\*\bkmkend _VV1594} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1595}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1595} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1596}looking{\*\bkmkend _VV1596} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1597}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1597} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1598}better
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1599M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1598}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1599M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1600}Let's{\*\bkmkend _VV1600} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1601}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV1601} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1602}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1602} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1603}knows{\*\bkmkend _VV1603} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1604}when{\*\bkmkend _VV1604} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1605}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1605} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1606}stop{\*\bkmkstart _VV1607M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1606}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1607M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1608}Most{\*\bkmkend _VV1608} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1609}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV1609} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1610}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1610} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1611}ewes{\*\bkmkend _VV1611} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1612}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1612} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1613}now{\*\bkmkend _VV1613} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1614}lam{\*\bkmkstart _VV1638}
bed{\*\bkmkstart _VV1615M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1614},{\*\bkmkend _VV1615M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1616}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1616} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1617}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1617} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1618}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1618} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1619}about{\*\bkmkend _VV1619} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1624M}150{\*\bkmkend _VV1624M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1625}hoggs{\*\bkmkend _VV1625} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1626}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1626} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1627}lamb{\*\bkmkstart _VV1628M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1627},{\*\bkmkend _VV1628M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1629}
and{\*\bkmkend _VV1629} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1630}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1630} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1631}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1631} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1632}just{\*\bkmkend _VV1632} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1633}started{\*\bkmkstart _VV1634M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1633},
{\*\bkmkend _VV1634M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1635}so{\*\bkmkend _VV1635} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1636}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1636} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1637}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1637} be still{\*\bkmkend _VV1638} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1639}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1639} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1640
}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1640} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1641}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1641} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1642}middle{\*\bkmkend _VV1642} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1645M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1645M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1646M}June{\*\bkmkstart _VV1647M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1646M}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1647M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1648}Sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV1648} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1649}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1649} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1650}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1650} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1651}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1651} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1697}dear
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1653M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1697},{\*\bkmkend _VV1653M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1654}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1654} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1655}many{\*\bkmkend _VV1655} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1656}spring{\*\bkmkend _VV1656} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1657}lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV1657}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1658}about{\*\bkmkend _VV1658} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1659}yet{\*\bkmkend _VV1659} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1660}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1660} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1661}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1661} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1662}rise{\*\bkmkend _VV1662} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1663
}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1663} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1664}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1664} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1665}euro{\*\bkmkend _VV1665} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1666}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1666} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1667}making{\*\bkmkend _VV1667} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1668}exporting
{\*\bkmkend _VV1668} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1669}easier{\*\bkmkstart _VV1670M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1669}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1670M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1698}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1698} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1672}mass{\*\bkmkend _VV1672} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1673}cull{\*\bkmkend _VV1673} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1674}has{\*\bkmkend _VV1674} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1675}certainly{\*\bkmkend _VV1675} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1676}put{\*\bkmkend _VV1676} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1677}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1677} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1678}floor{\*\bkmkend _VV1678} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1680}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1680} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1681}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1681} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1699}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV1699} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1683}job{\*\bkmkstart _VV1684M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1683},{\*\bkmkend _VV1684M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1685}
let's{\*\bkmkend _VV1685} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1686}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV1686} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1687}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1687} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1688}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1688} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1689}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV1689} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1690}see
{\*\bkmkend _VV1690} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1691}everybody{\*\bkmkend _VV1691} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1692}rushing{\*\bkmkend _VV1692} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1693}back{\*\bkmkend _VV1693} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1694}into{\*\bkmkend _VV1694} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1695}sheep
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1696M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1695}.{\*\bkmkstart _VV1700M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1696M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1701M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1700M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1702}{\*\bkmkend _VV1701M}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1702} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1705M}72
{\*\bkmkend _VV1705M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1707}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1707} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1708}rain
{\*\bkmkend _VV1708} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1710}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1710} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1711}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1711} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1712}coming{\*\bkmkend _VV1712} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1713}down{\*\bkmkstart _VV1714M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1713},{\*\bkmkend _VV1714M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1715}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1715} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1716}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1716} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1717}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1717} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1718}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1718} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1719}colder{\*\bkmkend _VV1719} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1720}
this{\*\bkmkend _VV1720} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1721}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV1722M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1721}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1722M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1723}We{\*\bkmkend _VV1723} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1724}stopped{\*\bkmkend _VV1724} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1725}feeding
{\*\bkmkend _VV1725} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1726}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1726} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1727}ewes{\*\bkmkend _VV1727} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1728}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1728} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1729}lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV1729} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1730}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1730} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1731}weekend{\*\bkmkstart _VV1732M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1731},{\*\bkmkend _VV1732M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1733}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1733} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1734}now{\*\bkmkend _VV1734} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1735}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1735} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1736}
are{\*\bkmkend _VV1736} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1737}worried{\*\bkmkend _VV1737} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1738}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1738} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1739}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1739} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1740}might{\*\bkmkend _VV1740} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1741}take
{\*\bkmkend _VV1741} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1742}staggers}{\cs20\f0\fs24\super\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkend _VV1742}\chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid15084715 \chftn }{\insrsid15084715  Metabolic disease (hypomagnesia)}}}{\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715  {\*\bkmkstart _VV1743}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1743} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1744}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV1744} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1745}cold{\*\bkmkend _VV1745} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1746}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV1746} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1747}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1747} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1748}wet{\*\bkmkend _VV1748} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1749}grass
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1750M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1749}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1750M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1751}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1751} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1752}hoggs{\*\bkmkend _VV1752} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1753}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1753} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1754}started{\*\bkmkend _VV1754
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1755}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1755} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1756}lamb{\*\bkmkend _VV1756} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1757}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1757} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1758}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1758}re {\*\bkmkstart _VV1759}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1759} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1760}
slow{\*\bkmkstart _VV1761M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1760}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1761M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1762}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1762} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1763}think{\*\bkmkend _VV1763} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1764}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1764} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1765}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1765} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1766}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1766} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1767}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1767} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1768}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV1768} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1769}well{\*\bkmkend _VV1769} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1770}into{\*\bkmkend _VV1770} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1772M}June{\*\bkmkstart _VV1773M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1772M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1773M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1774}There{\*\bkmkend _VV1774} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1775}doesn't{\*\bkmkend _VV1775} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1776}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV1776} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1777}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1777} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1778}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1778} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1779}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1779} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1780}progress{\*\bkmkend _VV1780} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1781}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1781} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1782}
the{\*\bkmkend _VV1782} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1783}Agenda{\*\bkmkend _VV1783} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1786M}2000{\*\bkmkend _VV1786M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1787}meetings{\*\bkmkend _VV1787} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1788}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1788} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1789}Europe
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1790M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1789}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1790M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1791}France{\*\bkmkstart _VV1792M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1791},{\*\bkmkend _VV1792M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1793}Ireland{\*\bkmkend _VV1793} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1794}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1794}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1795}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1795} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1796}few{\*\bkmkend _VV1796} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1797}more{\*\bkmkend _VV1797} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1798}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV1798} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1799}want{\*\bkmkend _VV1799} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1800}
to{\*\bkmkend _VV1800} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1801}see{\*\bkmkend _VV1801} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1802}any{\*\bkmkend _VV1802} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1803}change{\*\bkmkend _VV1803} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1804}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1804} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1805}agricultural
{\*\bkmkend _VV1805} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1806}support{\*\bkmkend _VV1806} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1807}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1807} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1808}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1808} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1809}least{\*\bkmkend _VV1809} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1814M}2006
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1815M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1814M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1815M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1816}There{\*\bkmkend _VV1816} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1817}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV1817} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1818}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1818} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1819}partial{\*\bkmkend _VV1819
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1820}decoupling{\*\bkmkend _VV1820} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1821}agreement{\*\bkmkend _VV1821} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1822}will{\*\bkmkend _VV1822} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1823}win{\*\bkmkend _VV1823} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1824}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1824} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1825}day{\*\bkmkstart _VV1826M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1825},{\*\bkmkend _VV1826M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1827}which{\*\bkmkend _VV1827} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1828}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1828} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1829}agree{\*\bkmkend _VV1829} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1830}
with{\*\bkmkstart _VV1831M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1830}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1831M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par 
\par 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1832}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1832} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1835M}73{\*\bkmkend _VV1835M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1836}Still{\*\bkmkend _VV1836} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1837}cold
{\*\bkmkend _VV1837} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1838}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1838} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1839}wet{\*\bkmkend _VV1839} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1840}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1840} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1841}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV1842M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1841}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1842M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1843}Lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV1843} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1844}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1844} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1845}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1845} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1846}looking{\*\bkmkend _VV1846} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1847}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1847} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1848}well{\*\bkmkend _VV1848} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1849}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1849} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1850}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1850} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1851}did{\*\bkmkstart _VV1852M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1851}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1852M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1853}
Spring{\*\bkmkend _VV1853} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1855}barley{\*\bkmkend _VV1855} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1856}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1856} going a bit {\*\bkmkstart _VV1860}yellow{\*\bkmkend _VV1860} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1861}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1861} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1862}all
{\*\bkmkend _VV1862} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1863}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1863} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1864}rain{\*\bkmkstart _VV1865M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1864},{\*\bkmkend _VV1865M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1866}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1866} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1867}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1867} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1868}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1868} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1869}need{\*\bkmkend _VV1869} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1870}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1870} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1871}some{\*\bkmkend _VV1871} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1872}sun{\*\bkmkend _VV1872} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1873}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV1873} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1874}heat{\*\bkmkstart _VV1875M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1874}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1875M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1879}Went{\*\bkmkend _VV1879} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1880}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1880} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1881}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1881} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1882}meeting{\*\bkmkend _VV1882} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1883}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1883} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1884}Penrith{\*\bkmkend _VV1884} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1885}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1885} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1886}week{\*\bkmkend _VV1886} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1887}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1887} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1888}met{\*\bkmkend _VV1888} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1889}some{\*\bkmkend _VV1889} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1890}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1890} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1891}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1891} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1892}
other{\*\bkmkend _VV1892} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1893}people{\*\bkmkend _VV1893} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1894}from{\*\bkmkend _VV1894} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1895}all{\*\bkmkend _VV1895} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1896}walks{\*\bkmkend _VV1896} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1897}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV1897} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1898}life{\*\bkmkend _VV1898} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1899}who{\*\bkmkend _VV1899} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1900}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1900} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1901}writing{\*\bkmkend _VV1901} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1902}these
{\*\bkmkend _VV1902} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1903}diaries{\*\bkmkstart _VV1904M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1903}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1904M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1905}It{\*\bkmkend _VV1905} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1906}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1906} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1907}interesting
{\*\bkmkend _VV1907} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1908}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1908} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1909}hear{\*\bkmkend _VV1909} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1910}their{\*\bkmkend _VV1910} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1911}thoughts{\*\bkmkend _VV1911} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1913M}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV1913M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1914}opinions{\*\bkmkend _VV1914} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1916M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1916M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1917}F{\*\bkmkend _VV1917} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1919M}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1919M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1920}M{\*\bkmkend _VV1920}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1922M}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1922M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1923}how{\*\bkmkend _VV1923} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1924}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1924} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1925}affected{\*\bkmkend _VV1925} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1926}their{\*\bkmkend _VV1926} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1927}way{\*\bkmkend _VV1927} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1928}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1928} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1929}life{\*\bkmkstart _VV1930M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1929}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1930M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1931}What{\*\bkmkend _VV1931} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1932}
stood{\*\bkmkend _VV1932} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1933}out{\*\bkmkend _VV1933} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1934}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1934} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1935}none{\*\bkmkend _VV1935} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1936}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1936} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1937}us{\*\bkmkend _VV1937} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1938}had{\*\bkmkend _VV1938} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1939}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1939} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1940}high{\*\bkmkend _VV1940} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1941}opinion{\*\bkmkend _VV1941} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1942}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1942} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1943}
the{\*\bkmkend _VV1943} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1944}government{\*\bkmkend _VV1944} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1945}or{\*\bkmkend _VV1945} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1946}DEFRA{\*\bkmkstart _VV1947M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1946},{\*\bkmkend _VV1947M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1948}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV1948} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1949}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1949} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1950}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1950} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1951}vet{\*\bkmkend _VV1951} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1952}said{\*\bkmkend _VV1952} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1954}if{\*\bkmkend _VV1954} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1955}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1955} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1956}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1956} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1957}another{\*\bkmkend _VV1957} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1958}outbreak{\*\bkmkend _VV1958} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1959}he{\*\bkmkend _VV1959} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1960}doesn't{\*\bkmkend _VV1960} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1961}think{\*\bkmkend _VV1961} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1962}DEFRA{\*\bkmkend _VV1962} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1963}will{\*\bkmkend _VV1963} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1964}handle{\*\bkmkend _VV1964} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1965}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1965} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1966}any{\*\bkmkend _VV1966} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1967}better{\*\bkmkstart _VV1968M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1967}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1968M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1969}God{\*\bkmkend _VV1969} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1970}
help{\*\bkmkend _VV1970} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1971}us{\*\bkmkstart _VV1972M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1971}!{\*\bkmkend _VV1972M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1973}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1973} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1976M}74{\*\bkmkend _VV1976M}
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1977}We{\*\bkmkend _VV1977} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1978}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1978} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1979}been{\*\bkmkend _VV1979} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1980}having{\*\bkmkend _VV1980} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1981}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1981} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1982}
lot{\*\bkmkend _VV1982} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1983}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1983} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1984}trouble{\*\bkmkend _VV1984} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1985}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1985} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1986}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1986} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1987}few
{\*\bkmkend _VV1987} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1988}months{\*\bkmkend _VV1988} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1989}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1989} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1990}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1990} BCMS {\*\bkmkstart _VV1991}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1991} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1992}Workington
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1993M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1992}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1993M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1994}We{\*\bkmkend _VV1994} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1995}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1995} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1996}owed{\*\bkmkend _VV1996} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1997}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1997} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1998}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV1998} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1999}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1999} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2000}subsidy{\*\bkmkend _VV2000} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2001}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2001} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2002}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2002} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2003}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2003} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2004}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2004} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2005}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2005} RPA {\*\bkmkstart _VV2006}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2006} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2007}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2007} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2008}pay{\*\bkmkend _VV2008} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2009}up{\*\bkmkend _VV2009} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2010}until{\*\bkmkend _VV2010} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2011}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2011} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2012}mistakes{\*\bkmkend _VV2012} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2013}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2013} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2014}put{\*\bkmkend _VV2014} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2015}right{\*\bkmkstart _VV2016M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2015}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2016M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2017}Every{\*\bkmkend _VV2017} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2018}
farmer{\*\bkmkend _VV2018} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2019}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2019} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2020}speak{\*\bkmkend _VV2020} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2021}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2021} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2022}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2022} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2023}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2023}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2024}same{\*\bkmkend _VV2024} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2025}problem{\*\bkmkstart _VV2026M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2025}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2026M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2027}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2027} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2028}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2028} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2029}
a{\*\bkmkend _VV2029} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2030}disgrace{\*\bkmkend _VV2030} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2031}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2031} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2032}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2032} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2033}number{\*\bkmkend _VV2033} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2034}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV2034} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2035}staff{\*\bkmkend _VV2035} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2036}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2036} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2037}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2037} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2038}how{\*\bkmkend _VV2038} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2039}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2039}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2040}can{\*\bkmkend _VV2040} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2041}make{\*\bkmkend _VV2041} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2042}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2042} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2043}many{\*\bkmkend _VV2043} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2044}mistakes{\*\bkmkstart _VV2045M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2044}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2045M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2046}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2046} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2047}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV2047} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2048}think{\*\bkmkend _VV2048} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2049}DEFRA{\*\bkmkend _VV2049} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2050}
realised{\*\bkmkend _VV2050} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2051}what{\*\bkmkend _VV2051} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2052}the{\*\bkmkstart _VV2081}y{\*\bkmkend _VV2052} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2053}were{\*\bkmkend _VV2053} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2054}taking{\*\bkmkend _VV2054} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2055}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2055} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2056}when{\*\bkmkend _VV2056} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2057}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2057} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2058}set{\*\bkmkend _VV2058} BCMS {\*\bkmkstart _VV2061}up{\*\bkmkstart _VV2062M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2061}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2062M}
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2063}Had{\*\bkmkend _VV2063} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2064}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2064} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2065}day{\*\bkmkend _VV2065} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2066}off{\*\bkmkend _VV2066} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2067}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2067} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2068}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV2068} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2069}races{\*\bkmkend _VV2069} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2070}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2070} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2071}Kelso{\*\bkmkend _VV2071} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2072}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2072} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2073}week
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2074M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2073}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2074M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2075}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2075} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2076}local{\*\bkmkend _VV2076} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2077}discussion{\*\bkmkend _VV2077} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2078}group
{\*\bkmkend _VV2078} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2079}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2079} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2080}an{\*\bkmkend _VV2080} away day{\*\bkmkend _VV2081} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2082}every{\*\bkmkend _VV2082} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2084M}May{\*\bkmkend _VV2084M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2085}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2085} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2086}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2086} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2087}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2087} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2088}good{\*\bkmkend _VV2088} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2089}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2089} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2090}get
{\*\bkmkend _VV2090} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2091}away{\*\bkmkend _VV2091} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2092}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2092} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2093}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2093} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2094}usual{\*\bkmkend _VV2094} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2095}chores
{\*\bkmkend _VV2095} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2096}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2096} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2097}change{\*\bkmkstart _VV2098M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2097}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2098M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2099}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2099} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2100}also{\*\bkmkend _VV2100} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2101}turned{\*\bkmkend _VV2101} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2102}out{\*\bkmkend _VV2102} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2103}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2103} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2104}profitable{\*\bkmkstart _VV2105M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2104}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2105M}
\par 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2106}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2106} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2109M}75{\*\bkmkend _VV2109M} 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2111}There{\*\bkmkend _VV2111} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2112}seems
{\*\bkmkend _VV2112} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2113}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2113} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2114}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2114} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2115}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2115} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2116}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2116} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2118M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2118M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2119}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV2119} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2120}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2120} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2121}started{\*\bkmkend _VV2121} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2122}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2122} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2123}make{\*\bkmkend _VV2123} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2124}silage{\*\bkmkend _VV2124} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2125}these{\*\bkmkend _VV2125} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2126}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2126} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2127}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2127} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2128}days{\*\bkmkstart _VV2129M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2128},{\*\bkmkend _VV2129M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2130}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2130} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2131}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2131} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2132}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2132} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2133}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2133} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2134}rain
{\*\bkmkend _VV2134} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2135}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2135} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2136}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2136} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2137}weekend{\*\bkmkend _VV2137} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2138}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2138} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2139}put{\*\bkmkend _VV2139} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2140}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2140} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2141}stop{\*\bkmkend _VV2141} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2142}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2142} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2143}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV2144M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2143}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2144M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2145}Crops
{\*\bkmkend _VV2145} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2146}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2146} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2147}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2147} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2148}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2148} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2149}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2149} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2150}{\*\bkmkstart _VV2167}heavy
{\*\bkmkend _VV2150} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2151}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2151} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2152}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2152} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2153}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2153} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2154}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2154} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2155}wet{\*\bkmkstart _VV2156M
}{\*\bkmkend _VV2155}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2156M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2157}I've{\*\bkmkend _VV2157} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2158}heard{\*\bkmkend _VV2158} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2159}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2159} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2161M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV2161M} or two 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2164}silage{\*\bkmkend _VV2164} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2165}pits{\*\bkmkend _VV2165} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2166}collapsing{\*\bkmkend _VV2166} round about{\*\bkmkstart _VV2168M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2167}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2168M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2169}We
{\*\bkmkend _VV2169} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2170}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2170} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2171}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2171} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2172}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV2172} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2173}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2173} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2174}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2174}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2175}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2175} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2176}slowing{\*\bkmkend _VV2176} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2177}down{\*\bkmkend _VV2177} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2178}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2178} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2179}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2179} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2180}
trickle{\*\bkmkstart _VV2181M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2180}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2181M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2182}Have{\*\bkmkend _VV2182} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2183}been{\*\bkmkend _VV2183} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2184}selling{\*\bkmkend _VV2184} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2185}fat
{\*\bkmkend _VV2185} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2186}hoggs{\*\bkmkend _VV2186} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2187}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2187} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2188}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2188} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2189}week{\*\bkmkend _VV2189} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2212}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2212} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2213}so{\*\bkmkstart _VV2191M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2213},{\*\bkmkend _VV2191M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2192}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2192} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2193}prices{\*\bkmkend _VV2193} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2194}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2194} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2195}
still{\*\bkmkend _VV2195} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2196}good{\*\bkmkstart _VV2197M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2196},{\*\bkmkend _VV2197M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2198}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2198} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2199}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2199} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2200}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2200}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2201}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2201} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2202}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2202} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2203}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2203} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2205M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2205M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2206}spring{\*\bkmkend _VV2206} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2207}
lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV2207} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2208}around{\*\bkmkend _VV2208} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2209}yet{\*\bkmkstart _VV2210M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2209}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2210M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2214}Since{\*\bkmkend _VV2214} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2215}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV2215} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2216}F{\*\bkmkend _VV2216} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2218M}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2218M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2219}M{\*\bkmkend _VV2219} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2220}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV2220} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2221}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV2221} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2222}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2222} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2223}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2223} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2224}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2224} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2225}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV2225} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2226}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2226} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2227}
early{\*\bkmkend _VV2227} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2228}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2228} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2229}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2229} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2230}used{\*\bkmkend _VV2230} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2231}to{\*\bkmkstart _VV2232M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2231}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2232M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2233}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2233} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2234}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2234} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2235}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2235} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2236}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2236} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2237}less{\*\bkmkend _VV2237} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2238}
expensive{\*\bkmkend _VV2238} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2239}if{\*\bkmkend _VV2239} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2240}you{\*\bkmkend _VV2240} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2241}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV2241} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2243M}April{\*\bkmkend _VV2243M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2244}when
{\*\bkmkend _VV2244} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2245}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2245} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2246}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2246} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2247}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2247} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2248}good{\*\bkmkend _VV2248} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2249}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2249} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2250}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2250} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2251}grass{\*\bkmkend _VV2251} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2252}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2252} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2253}growing{\*\bkmkstart _VV2254M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2253}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2254M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2255}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2255} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2258M}76{\*\bkmkend _VV2258M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2259}Crops{\*\bkmkend _VV2259} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2260}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV2260} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2261}grass{\*\bkmkend _VV2261} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2262}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2262} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2263}really{\*\bkmkend _VV2263} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2264}growing{\*\bkmkend _VV2264} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2265}now
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2266M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2265}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2266M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2267}After{\*\bkmkend _VV2267} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2268}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2268} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2270M}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2270M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2271}rain{\*\bkmkend _VV2271} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2272}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2272} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2275M}May{\*\bkmkend _VV2275M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2276M}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2276M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2277}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2277} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2278}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2278} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2279}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2279} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2280}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2280} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2281}warmer{\*\bkmkend _VV2281} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2282}now{\*\bkmkend _VV2282}. There {\*\bkmkstart _VV2284}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV2284} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2285}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2285} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2286}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2286} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2287}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2287} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2288}big{\*\bkmkend _VV2288} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2289}crops{\*\bkmkend _VV2289} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2291M}
of{\*\bkmkend _VV2291M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2292}silage{\*\bkmkend _VV2292} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2293}been{\*\bkmkend _VV2293} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2294}cut{\*\bkmkend _VV2294} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2295}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2295} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2296}farmers
{\*\bkmkend _VV2296} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2297}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2297} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2298}fetching{\*\bkmkend _VV2298} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2404}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2404} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2301}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2301} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2302}really{\*\bkmkend _VV2302
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2303}fast{\*\bkmkstart _VV2304M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2303}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2304M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2305}A{\*\bkmkend _VV2305} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2306}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2306} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2307}different{\*\bkmkend _VV2307} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2308}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2308} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2309}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2309} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2310}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2310} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2311}when{\*\bkmkend _VV2311} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2312}you{\*\bkmkend _VV2312} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2313}
could{\*\bkmkend _VV2313} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2314}hardly{\*\bkmkend _VV2314} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2315}walk{\*\bkmkend _VV2315} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2316}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2316} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2317}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2317} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2318}land
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2319M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2318}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2319M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2320}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2320} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2321}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2321} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2322}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2322} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2323}lambing{\*\bkmkend _VV2323} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2324}just{\*\bkmkend _VV2324} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2326M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV2326M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2327}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2327} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2329M}two{\*\bkmkend _VV2329M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2330}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2330} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2331}
day{\*\bkmkstart _VV2332M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2331}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2332M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2333}But{\*\bkmkend _VV2333} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2334}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2334} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2335}sun{\*\bkmkend _VV2335} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2336}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2336} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2337}warm{\*\bkmkend _VV2337} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2338}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2338} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2339}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2339} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2340}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2340} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2341}doing{\*\bkmkend _VV2341} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2342}well{\*\bkmkend _VV2342} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2343}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2343} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2344}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2344} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2345}word{\*\bkmkend _VV2345} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2346}go{\*\bkmkstart _VV2347M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2346}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV2347M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2348}Spring{\*\bkmkend _VV2348} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2349}lambs{\*\bkmkend _VV2349} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2350}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2350} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2351}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2351} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2352}very
{\*\bkmkend _VV2352} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2353}dear{\*\bkmkstart _VV2354M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2353},{\*\bkmkend _VV2354M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2355}let's{\*\bkmkend _VV2355} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2356}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV2356} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2357}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2357} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2358}stay{\*\bkmkend _VV2358} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2359}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2359} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2360}way{\*\bkmkend _VV2360} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2361}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2361} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2362}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2362} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2363}
rest{\*\bkmkend _VV2363} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2364}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2364} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2365}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2365} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2366}year{\*\bkmkstart _VV2367M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2366}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2367M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2368}After{\*\bkmkend _VV2368}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2369}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2369} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2370}year's{\*\bkmkend _VV2370} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2371}poor{\*\bkmkend _VV2371} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2372}harvest{\*\bkmkend _VV2372} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2373}barley{\*\bkmkend _VV2373} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2374}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2374} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2375}getting{\*\bkmkend _VV2375} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2376}scarce{\*\bkmkend _VV2376} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2377}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2377} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2378}expensive{\*\bkmkend _VV2378} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2379}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2379} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2380}buy{\*\bkmkstart _VV2381M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2380}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2381M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2382}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2382} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2383}ar{\*\bkmkstart _VV2401}e{\*\bkmkend _VV2383} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2384}feeding{\*\bkmkend _VV2384} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2385}black-and-white{\*\bkmkend _VV2385} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2386}bulls{\*\bkmkend _VV2386} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2387}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2387} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2388}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2388} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2389}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2389} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2390}costing{\*\bkmkend _VV2390} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2394M}\'a3800{\*\bkmkend _VV2394M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2395}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2395} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2396}week{\*\bkmkend _VV2396} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2397}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2397} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2398}feed{\*\bkmkend _VV2398} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2399}them{\*\bkmkend _VV2399} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2400}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2400} roll on{\*\bkmkend _VV2401} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2402}harvest
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2403M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2402}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2403M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2405}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2405} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2408M}77{\*\bkmkend _VV2408M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2409}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2409} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2410}have
{\*\bkmkend _VV2410} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2411}been{\*\bkmkend _VV2411} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2412}trying{\*\bkmkend _VV2412} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2413}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2413} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2425}hunt{\*\bkmkend _VV2425} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2415}up{\*\bkmkend _VV2415} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2416}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2416} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2417}clippers{\*\bkmkend _VV2417} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2418}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2418} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2419}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2419} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2420}day{\*\bkmkend _VV2420} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2421}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2421} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2423M}two{\*\bkmkstart _VV2424M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2423M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2424M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2426}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2426} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2427}team{\*\bkmkend _VV2427} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2428}
that{\*\bkmkend _VV2428} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2429}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2429} clipped {\*\bkmkstart _VV2431}our{\*\bkmkend _VV2431} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2432}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV2432} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2433}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2433} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2434}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV2434} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2435}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2435} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2437M}10{\*\bkmkend _VV2437M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2438}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2438} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2439}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2439} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2440}packed
{\*\bkmkend _VV2440} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2441}in{\*\bkmkstart _VV2442M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2441}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2442M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2444M}One{\*\bkmkend _VV2444M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2445}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2445} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2446}them{\*\bkmkend _VV2446} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2447}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2447} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2448}rented{\*\bkmkend _VV2448} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2449}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2449} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2450}farm{\*\bkmkend _VV2450} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2451}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2451} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2452}he
{\*\bkmkend _VV2452} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2453}doesn't{\*\bkmkend _VV2453} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2454}think{\*\bkmkend _VV2454} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2455}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2455} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2456}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2456} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2457}have
{\*\bkmkend _VV2457} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2458}time{\*\bkmkend _VV2458} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2459}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2459} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2460}spend{\*\bkmkend _VV2460} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2461}weeks{\*\bkmkend _VV2461} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2462}away{\*\bkmkend _VV2462}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2463}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2463} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2464}home{\*\bkmkstart _VV2465M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2464}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2465M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2466}Since{\*\bkmkend _VV2466} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2467}F{\*\bkmkend _VV2467} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2469M}
and{\*\bkmkend _VV2469M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2470}M{\*\bkmkend _VV2470} there {\*\bkmkstart _VV2472}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV2472} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2473}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2473} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2474}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2474} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2475}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2475
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2476}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2476} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2477M}"{\*\bkmkstart _VV2478}{\*\bkmkend _VV2477M}one-man{\*\bkmkend _VV2478} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2479}bands{\*\bkmkstart _VV2480M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2479}"{\*\bkmkend _VV2480M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2481}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2481} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2517}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2517} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2483}disappeared{\*\bkmkend _VV2483} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2484}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2484} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2485}rural{\*\bkmkend _VV2485} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2486}life{\*\bkmkstart _VV2487M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2486}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2487M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2488}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2488} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2489}used{\*\bkmkend _VV2489} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2490}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2490} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2491}have
{\*\bkmkend _VV2491} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2492}Mole{\*\bkmkend _VV2492} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2493}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2493} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2494}Rat{\*\bkmkend _VV2494} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2495}catchers{\*\bkmkend _VV2495} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2496}come
{\*\bkmkend _VV2496} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2497}around{\*\bkmkend _VV2497} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2498}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2498} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2499}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2499} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2500}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2500} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2501}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2501}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2502}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2502} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2503}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2503} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2504}gone{\*\bkmkend _VV2504} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2505}now{\*\bkmkstart _VV2506M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2505},{\*\bkmkend _VV2506M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2507}
maybe{\*\bkmkend _VV2507} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2508}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2508} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2509}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2509} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2510}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2510} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2511}working{\*\bkmkend _VV2511} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2512}for
{\*\bkmkend _VV2512} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2513}DEFRA{\*\bkmkstart _VV2514M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2513}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2514M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2519M}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2519M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2520}winter{\*\bkmkend _VV2520} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2521}barley
{\*\bkmkend _VV2521} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2522}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2522} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2523}starting{\*\bkmkend _VV2523} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2524}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2524} ripen {\*\bkmkstart _VV2527}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2527} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2528}quick
{\*\bkmkend _VV2528} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2529}now{\*\bkmkstart _VV2530M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2529},{\*\bkmkend _VV2530M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2531}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2531} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2532}would{\*\bkmkend _VV2532} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2533}think{\*\bkmkend _VV2533} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2534}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2534} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2535}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2535} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2536}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2536} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2537}harvesting{\*\bkmkend _VV2537} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2538}by{\*\bkmkend _VV2538} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2539}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2539} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2540}middle{\*\bkmkend _VV2540} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2543M}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2543M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2544M}July{\*\bkmkstart _VV2545M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2544M},{\*\bkmkend _VV2545M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2546}let's{\*\bkmkend _VV2546} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2547}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV2547} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2548}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2548} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2549}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2549} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2550}no{\*\bkmkend _VV2550} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2551
}thunderstorms{\*\bkmkend _VV2551} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2552}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2552} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2553}high{\*\bkmkend _VV2553} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2554}winds{\*\bkmkend _VV2554} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2555}until{\*\bkmkend _VV2555} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2556}harvest
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2557M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2556}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2557M} 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2559}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2559} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2562M}78{\*\bkmkend _VV2562M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2563}There{\*\bkmkend _VV2563} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2564}is
{\*\bkmkend _VV2564} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2565}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2565} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2566}no{\*\bkmkend _VV2566} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2567}agreement{\*\bkmkend _VV2567} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2568}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2568} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2569}Europe
{\*\bkmkend _VV2569} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2570}over{\*\bkmkend _VV2570} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2571}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2571} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2572}reforms{\*\bkmkend _VV2572} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2573}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2573} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2574}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2574} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2575}C{\*\bkmkstart _VV2578}{\*\bkmkend _VV2575}AP{\*\bkmkstart _VV2579M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2578}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2579M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2580}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2580} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2581}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2581} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2582}affecting
{\*\bkmkend _VV2582} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2583}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2583} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2584}prices{\*\bkmkend _VV2584} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2585}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2585} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2586}young{\*\bkmkend _VV2586} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2587}stock
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2588M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2587},{\*\bkmkend _VV2588M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2589}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2589} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2590}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV2590} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2591}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV2591} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2592}know{\*\bkmkend _VV2592}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2593}whether{\*\bkmkend _VV2593} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2594}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2594} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2595}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2595} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2596}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2596} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2597}any{\*\bkmkend _VV2597} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2598}subsidy{\*\bkmkend _VV2598} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2599}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2599} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2600}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2600} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2601}next{\*\bkmkend _VV2601} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2602}year{\*\bkmkstart _VV2603M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2602}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2603M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2604}You{\*\bkmkend _VV2604} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2605}can't{\*\bkmkend _VV2605} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2606}claim{\*\bkmkend _VV2606} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2607}subsidy{\*\bkmkend _VV2607} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2608}until{\*\bkmkend _VV2608} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2609}animals{\*\bkmkend _VV2609} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2610}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2610} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2612M}seven{\*\bkmkend _VV2612M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2613}months{\*\bkmkend _VV2613} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2614}old{\*\bkmkstart _VV2615M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2614}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2615M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2616}Most{\*\bkmkend _VV2616} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2617}experts{\*\bkmkend _VV2617} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2618}predict{\*\bkmkend _VV2618} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2619}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2619} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2620}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2620} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2621}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2621} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2622}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2622} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2623}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2623} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2624
}sort{\*\bkmkend _VV2624} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2625}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2625} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2626}decoupling{\*\bkmkend _VV2626} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2627}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2627} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2628}don't{\*\bkmkend _VV2628} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2629}know
{\*\bkmkend _VV2629} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2630}what{\*\bkmkstart _VV2631M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2630}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2631M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2632}France{\*\bkmkend _VV2632} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2633}doesn't{\*\bkmkend _VV2633} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2634}want
{\*\bkmkend _VV2634} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2635}any{\*\bkmkend _VV2635} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2636}changes{\*\bkmkend _VV2636} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2637}until{\*\bkmkend _VV2637} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2642M}2006{\*\bkmkstart _VV2643M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2642M}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV2643M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2644}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2644} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2645}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2645} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2646}gets{\*\bkmkend _VV2646} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2647}better{\*\bkmkend _VV2647} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2648}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV2648} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2649}better{\*\bkmkstart _VV2650M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2649}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2650M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2651}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2651} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2652}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2652} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2653}never{\*\bkmkend _VV2653} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2654}seen{\*\bkmkend _VV2654} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2656M}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2656M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2657}countryside{\*\bkmkend _VV2657} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2658}looking{\*\bkmkend _VV2658} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2687}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2687} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2686}green{\*\bkmkstart _VV2661M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2686}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2661M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2662}Most{\*\bkmkend _VV2662} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2663}farms{\*\bkmkend _VV2663} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2664}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2664} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2665}never{\*\bkmkend _VV2665} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2666}had{\*\bkmkend _VV2666} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2667}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2667} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2668}much{\*\bkmkend _VV2668} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2669}grass{\*\bkmkend _VV2669} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2670
}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2670} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2671}silage{\*\bkmkstart _VV2672M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2671}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2672M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2673}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2673} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2674}must{\*\bkmkend _VV2674} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2675}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2675
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2676}been{\*\bkmkend _VV2676} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2677}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2677} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2678}dry{\*\bkmkend _VV2678} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2679}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2679} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2680}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2680} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2682M}March{\*\bkmkend _VV2682M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2683}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2683} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2685M}April{\*\bkmkend _VV2685M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2688}back{\*\bkmkstart _VV2689M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2688}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2689M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2690}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2690} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2693M}79{\*\bkmkend _VV2693M}
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid15084715 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2694}Still{\*\bkmkend _VV2694} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2695}waiting
{\*\bkmkend _VV2695} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2696}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2696} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2697}sheep{\*\bkmkend _VV2697} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2698}clippers{\*\bkmkend _VV2698} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2699}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2699} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2700}come
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2701M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2700}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2701M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2702}Expected{\*\bkmkend _VV2702} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2703}them{\*\bkmkend _VV2703} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2704}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2704} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2705}weekend
{\*\bkmkend _VV2705} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2706}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2706} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2707}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2707} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2708}rained{\*\bkmkend _VV2708} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2709}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2709} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2710}day{\*\bkmkend _VV2710} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2711}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2711} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2712}Saturday{\*\bkmkstart _VV2713M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2712}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2713M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2714}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2714} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2715}rain{\*\bkmkend _VV2715} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2716
}did{\*\bkmkend _VV2716} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2717}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2717} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2718}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2718} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2719}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2719} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2720}good{\*\bkmkend _VV2720} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2721}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2721} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2722}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2722} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2723}ground{\*\bkmkend _VV2723} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2724}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2724} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2725}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2725} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2726}dry{\*\bkmkend _VV2726} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2727}
and{\*\bkmkend _VV2727} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2728}starting{\*\bkmkend _VV2728} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2729}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2729} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2730}crack{\*\bkmkstart _VV2731M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2730}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2731M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2732}Most
{\*\bkmkend _VV2732} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2733}people{\*\bkmkend _VV2733} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2741}finished{\*\bkmkend _VV2741} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2736}silaging{\*\bkmkend _VV2736} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2737}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2737} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2745}a
{\*\bkmkend _VV2745} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2743}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2743} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2744}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2744} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2738}making{\*\bkmkend _VV2738} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2739}hay{\*\bkmkstart _VV2740M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2739}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2740M}
 The {\*\bkmkstart _VV2748}latest{\*\bkmkend _VV2748} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2749}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2749} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2750}Europe{\*\bkmkend _VV2750} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2751}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2751} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2752}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2752} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2753}decoupling{\*\bkmkend _VV2753} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2754}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2754} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2755}start{\*\bkmkend _VV2755} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2756}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2756} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2761M}2005{\*\bkmkstart _VV2762M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2761M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2762M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2763}This{\*\bkmkend _VV2763} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2764}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2764} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2765}give{\*\bkmkend _VV2765} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2766}farmers{\*\bkmkend _VV2766} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2768M}two{\*\bkmkend _VV2768M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2769}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2769} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2770}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2770} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2771}plan{\*\bkmkend _VV2771} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2772}what{\*\bkmkend _VV2772} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2773}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2773} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2774}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2774} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2775}going{\*\bkmkend _VV2775} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2776}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2776} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2777}do{\*\bkmkend _VV2777} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2778}
after{\*\bkmkend _VV2778} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2779}subsidies{\*\bkmkstart _VV2780M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2779}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2780M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2781}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2781} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2782}government{\*\bkmkend _VV2782} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2783}believes
{\*\bkmkend _VV2783} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2784}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2784} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2785}prices{\*\bkmkend _VV2785} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2786}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2786} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2787}rise{\*\bkmkend _VV2787} but that {\*\bkmkstart _VV2791}remains
{\*\bkmkend _VV2791} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2792}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2792} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2793}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2793} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2794}seen{\*\bkmkstart _VV2795M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2794}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2795M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2796}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2796} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2797}food{\*\bkmkend _VV2797} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2798}trade{\*\bkmkend _VV2798} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2799}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2799} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2800}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2800} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2801}habit{\*\bkmkend _VV2801} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2802}
of{\*\bkmkend _VV2802} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2803}importing{\*\bkmkend _VV2803} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2804}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2804} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2805}lot{\*\bkmkend _VV2805} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2806}more{\*\bkmkend _VV2806} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2807}if{\*\bkmkend _VV2807
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2808}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2808} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2809}gets{\*\bkmkend _VV2809} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2810}too{\*\bkmkend _VV2810} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2811}expensive{\*\bkmkend _VV2811} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2812}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2812} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2813}buy{\*\bkmkend _VV2813} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2814}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2814} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2815}home{\*\bkmkstart _VV2816M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2815}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2816M}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15084715 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par  
\par 
\par }}