{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f46\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f49\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f50\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f52\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f53\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super 
\sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\s23\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext23 Body Text 3;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid984239
\rsid4665133\rsid8087401\rsid10034901\rsid10552557\rsid11017238\rsid12189903\rsid13711609}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min55}{\version7}
{\edmins7}{\nofpages32}{\nofwords7100}{\nofchars40472}{\*\company UKDA}{\nofcharsws47478}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot4665133 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid12189903 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid12189903 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid12189903 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid12189903 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid12189903 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid4665133 Lancaster University
\par }{\insrsid12189903 Interview ID:  PM48}{\f1\insrsid12189903 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid12189903 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid984239 8}}}{\cs17\insrsid12189903 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid12189903 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid12189903 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid12189903 Date of Interview: 17/01/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\ul\insrsid12189903 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid12189903 Date of birth: 1948
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid12189903 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid12189903 Occupation: Group 1}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid12189903 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid12189903 \chftn }{\insrsid12189903  }{\b\insrsid12189903 Group 1 }{\insrsid12189903 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid12189903 Group 2 }{\insrsid12189903 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid12189903 Group 3 }{\insrsid12189903 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid12189903 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid12189903 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid12189903 Group 5 }{\insrsid12189903 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid12189903 Group 6 }{\insrsid12189903 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}}}{\fs24\insrsid12189903 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid12189903 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s23\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid12189903 Interview took place in respondent\rquote 
s kitchen in the farmhouse. Respondent has a Dumfriesshire accent and sometimes uses past participles in a characteristic way. MM interviewed, JB was present. JB\rquote s speech is prefixed with initials.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid12189903 What, what was the fi
rst thing that happened in your life that when you thought\'85
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 My daughter phoned, I\rquote ve got three daughters, the oldest one lives at Gretna and worked at Langholm (?), she got to work at Langholm and \lquote phoned to say, do you know they are cordoning off, there\rquote 
s police at Smalmstown Farm.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Gosh
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 So, I mean, we\rquote d, we\rquote d heard whispers of foot and mouth, that was only whispers, that was the first real foot and mouth thing at Smalmstown Farm
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So that was February?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Our vet, our local vet, was actually here that morning and I went out and said to the girl, what is going on, (laugh) but she\rquote d no idea but apparently, I don\rquote t think they had Longtown vets at Smalmstown Farm, but it
\rquote s confidential is it?  (laugh), so er, we didn\rquote t know, but it was on the news at night.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 That was the first, that I knew, I was supposed to be meeting up with my friend from ................. she lives at Brussels but she was in Glasgow for a week and I was meant, she was meant to be coming to visit, she \lquote 
phoned, er, the night before this happened to say she couldn\rquote t come.  and I thought it was because she\rquote d heard about foot and mouth on the television but it wasn\rquote t, it was \lquote cos they were snowed in in Glasgow, 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par Which we eventually, it must have been two nights ago, we eventually got that snow we went from being snowed in here to having foot and mouth, overnight, it\rquote s a, it\rquote 
s first time I remember our milk not being able to be lifted because of the weather
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Gosh, yes}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par And the first milk tanker that came here, unfortunately, was an arctic milk tanker so it couldn\rquote t pick up, it couldn\rquote t, it got in the road but it couldn\rquote t, now the dairy is right beside the road but it couldn\rquote 
t get the snow and the drifting snow it couldn\rquote t get in.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Do you happen to remember the 1967 crisis?}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par Oh no, no, which is peculiar because I was very much at Young Farmers then,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par And er, I, I said to another friend, I don\rquote t know, and she says well I\rquote m glad you said that because neither do I, apparently it was more because it was in England
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 And I, although we\rquote re the south of Scotland, we, we really didn\rquote t hit us
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So when it happened this year, you didn\rquote t sort of think, oh I know what it\rquote s going to be like, or
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, my father used to talk about the one in the early fifties that hit Scotland,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right, right was that very bad? Was your father a farmer?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no, well sort of.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Sort of yes
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 He was a haulage contractor and he lifted milk, so that got him involved, but I don\rquote t think it ever involved anything like what we\rquote ve put up with this time
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no, so what\rquote s it been like since, since that first day you, you heard about it, I mean, how\rquote s it affected you?}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par Well, er, do you know I\rquote ve never, I, my house needs tidied, I just couldn\rquote t set my mind to doing anything, 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 My husband was, he kept going because, well he had to, (laugh) farmers, but I just, worried constantly when it was going to hit us.  And I just, I pressed teletext and listened to Radio Cumbria }{\b0\f0\ul\insrsid12189903 all}{
\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  the time, listening
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Did you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh yes, I spent a lot of time thinking how near is it getting, it was most peculiar
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So when your neighbours started to get it. . . .
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well, we, we don\rquote t have anybody ... right, you know immediate neighbours, which, in fact it\rquote s just odd, it\rquote s odd spot it hasn\rquote t actually got a clump it\rquote s just an odd one here and there, it
\rquote s peculiar how it spread,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 You said this at the meeting, yeah, it is very peculiar
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 You see, G was probably, you see he was the only one in that corner sort of thing, well the one next to him got it, but I don\rquote t think it was his farm it was where, was it, I better watch what I say, it\rquote 
s (laugh) I wonder.  The story I got was more he had rented land somewhere else
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, er
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But I mean you don\rquote t know there\rquote s so many stories isn\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah, yeah......yeah, I mean I think there\rquote 
s a lot of people are saying that, that, they thought it, they thought it might have been around for a long time because, you know, longer than people have said, and in sheep because it\rquote s hard to tell
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes I think so, aha, it\rquote s very difficult to tell I quite agree with that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But you see the chap that works here, he got it in his, cattle.  He has a smallholding and he got it in his cattle at the beginning of April, he was sure he, he wouldn\rquote t get it because he never has sheep on his land.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, so was he not able to come here then?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh no, in fact he\rquote s, he, he wasn\rquote t here for six months, he wasn\rquote t allowed back here until October, I\rquote m saying that,  he came back to help us silage, it took, everything he does he\rquote 
s to get permission from DEFRA, he was allowed to.  We, we didn\rquote t know what to do for silage we could have got contractors in, but they\rquote d been in, they were going between diseased farms.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 It\rquote s the risks
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, you see were going to have a risk whatever whereas. }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  spoke to his field officer and he was allowed to come back if he stayed at a clean house so he\rquote 
d to go to his mother\rquote s house, three days before he came here. And he\rquote d to, she lives just half a mile from ours, and, and he\rquote d to stay there all the time he was here, and poor\'85
 he still cycles, he used to come back bobbing in his car or little tractor, but he still cycles, I think he thinks he\rquote s not going, so much germ, you know, you do wonder if you\rquote re, are you spreading germs (laugh).
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 He\rquote s probably healthier then, than he used to be if he\rquote s cycling a long way, it\rquote s ironical.
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, yes he cycles back and forwards, so he stayed at his mother\rquote s, but even then they sent a, DEFRA sent a vet to check his mother\rquote s, her place.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Really, for what?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well to see if it was a clean, what they call a clean place.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And that\rquote s just an ordinary house.
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, oh well no, she has land, she has a you know, she has land there but she\rquote ll never, she\rquote s more or less in a wheelchair poor soul, er, I think }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
 will probably rent her land from her sort of thing
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So it was that risk, that worry and anxiety and, were we going to get it, and when you didn\rquote t, you never got it did you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh I know, you now think, how did we not get it you know, how, I, I wish I knew somebody would tell me how it\rquote s spreads (laugh) I \lquote 
phoned the neighbour, this is in my diary, that way, now they join on to us and, poor soul, she was, actually she had had a cancer operatio
n just a few months before and she, both her and her daughter were beside each other in the bed, they took lumps in the neck(?) and that was September I think, September, October, in the Autumn.  and she hadn\rquote 
t recovered from that when this hit them.  they did most of their lambing and then they went down with it.  But they didn\rquote t have it at this neighbouring farm, they have another farm nearer Longtown, which joins on to G, and that\rquote 
s where they, they found it in the cattle there apparently
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So were then they culled as a dangerous contact?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I think they were and she, }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour?]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 , I said to me\'85 I haven\rquote t \lquote phoned her for ages, you see once }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
 got it here I didn\rquote t speak to anybody on the \lquote phone then, you know I used to talk to them, because I thought oh (big gasp) , I\rquote m not admitting to anything (laugh).
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh, cos of that pressure, yeah.
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, well you can\rquote 
t, you know you think it, it causes such a lot of friction so I did, I, I thought, the less we say the better, it saves stories getting spread, but however.  I mean MAFF did send Vets out checking, but there was never any mention of us being automatically
 taken away, which was strange when you, with what you read
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 With a contiguous cull
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, yes
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Or dangerous contact
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Dangerous contact even, well either
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, yes, but that was never mentioned
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But it depend what day of the week, (laughter) what room it was that week (laughing) from what you read in the paper, and in actual fact, after I come off the phone to }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
, I thought, you know, well I said to, I was reminding her about a story another farm up the road.  This farm that was near the school that lost its animals in the first week, they, MAFF let a ... cattle, one of the cattle I don\rquote 
t know what, an animal, got away, escaped, and went to a neighbouring farm and they didn\rquote t look for it that night, they didn\rquote t go looking for it until the next day, well the farmer kept it in his shed with his animals, he didn\rquote 
t know where it had came from.  So, so but apparently, the story is, but if it\rquote s story, he had to argue that, and he wasn\rquote t taken out with contiguous cull, 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh really
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But he argued, you see me, I don\rquote t think I\rquote d have been brave enough to argue
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Maybe now, but at that time, you know at that time I, I don\rquote t think I\rquote d have been brave enough to but however.  but then we were left without a worker, so, my husband and I had to work pretty hard \lquote cos he
\rquote s a very good worker we lost, six months he was away, he wasn\rquote t allowed back and even when he came back he\rquote d, he I thought he wasn\rquote t clearing his sheds well enough he had to er, he\rquote s knocked a few down rather than, 
\lquote cos he couldn\rquote t get them........
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, so did you get very tired the pair of you trying to manage on your own
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I don\rquote t think, we just, you know we sort of went into another gear and thought we didn\rquote t go out, well you couldn\rquote t go out.  The minute our, our youngest daughter actually, didn\rquote 
t I say, she had her twenty-first in May, well that was just a month, that was when we were still worried.  I mean any time I went away from here, I didn\rquote t know if I\rquote d get back, I reckoned I was going to come through the fields (laugh).

\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 In the dead of night
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
This is us Scots folk you know, you just, you just (laugh) we have a sense of hum..., a different sense of humour than everybody else they tell me but that, yes, in the dead of night I was going to come, I was going to walk through the fields, but any tim
e I went away\'85 so I went up to Edinburgh and er, I went to the theatre with her some of her friends and then they went on night clubbing and I came home (laugh).  But }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [name]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  couldn\rquote 
t go, well we needed somebody, you know he couldn\rquote t get away he was milking day in and day out, well you couldn\rquote 
t get anybody because they were all working for MAFF and DEFRA, you, you just, either that or you wondered if somebody would do it they\rquote d maybe say they hadn\rquote t been connected but they were.  So, then she graduated in Jul
y er, but we actually, it was a nice day, it was a lovely day so we all worked hard, she was home for then, we worked hard and got milking finished early, and up to Edinburgh.  the time fitted in, so we, and we did milking late when we came back at, it wa
s good, it was a nice day out actually
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Gosh
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 And don\rquote t tell anybody that we\rquote re from a farm,  you, you just wonder if, 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But on saying that, I\rquote ve said this, I went to secretarial college in Glasgow and that friend who\rquote s in Brussels, I mean, she actually, works with them top knobs in Brussels but. . . .
\par 
\par Oh
\par 
\par . . . .  er, she\rquote d, she\rquote s very confidential she doesn\rquote t tell me much about her work but er, she\rquote s not a farming person but she\rquote s been ever so, I\rquote ve got a lot of friends that have no farming co
nnections that have been on the \lquote phone being very kind.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, yes, this came up at the meeting didn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I found that
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 That understanding
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm I felt that yes, aha.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 That you felt wasn\rquote t there before the crisis?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh no, they\rquote re, they\rquote re, all, well sometimes she\rquote s they wonder what farming, we just don\rquote t talk about farming very much you know she\rquote 
s not connected and er, I do think they all wondered about BSE, so do I (laugh) again it\rquote s the Government handling
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, mmm
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But how do you explain to anybody?  But hopefully they\rquote re believing what they read in the papers now, I don\rquote t know, it\rquote 
s the way of the world.  And I think, I actually think a lot of its to do with the Government taking, even taking discipline out of schools, you go way back to people\rquote s school days, the problems
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 That\rquote s interesting
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 You know, at Shankhill I like it, they\rquote re, they don\rquote t, I mean they\rquote re not strict disciplinarians but they, you know everybody, if somebody\rquote s not doing something they have, the t
eacher has a chat to them (laugh) but er, it\rquote s a difficult thing
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So all that time, and I mean all through the summer and everything, did you feel er, sort of almost guilty for not getting it, you know, when other people were getting it?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no I don\rquote t think so, I don\rquote t know why.  But I don\rquote t think that, I don\rquote t think I ever felt that, I just , I can\rquote t believe how we missed it but, I spoke
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So you kind of expected it to come, to come really, you were kind of fatalistic about it really
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh yes I did, mm, but then there\rquote s others, you see, back to }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 , she\rquote s saying, you know we couldn\rquote t, she actually said to me we couldn\rquote 
t understand why you weren\rquote t taken out when }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  got it.  And I said well }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  that\rquote s why I stopped talk, I didn\rquote t \lquote 
phone you and I didn\rquote t speak to anybody else either.  I thought I was better being quiet, but er, I said, but then there\rquote s the same story, there\rquote s a similar story up the road when the animal got away and I says they\rquote 
ve still got their cattle and how did they not get it?  I say\rquote s I don\rquote t think animals should have been slaughtered as much, if you know, but I mean we were because }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
 had been working here and we were very closely connected, er, I do agree with that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, yeah, so what was it like, I mean did you, were you able to sell, er, did you have any income over the summer or were you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Ah well we\rquote ve got a dairy, so we, we\rquote re alright, I mean, it\rquote s more the, it\rquote s people, well I\rquote m not saying, we shouldn\rquote t say, my husband would say we shouldn\rquote t say we were a
lright,  but, it\rquote s people who don\rquote t have a milk, monthly milk cheque coming in that would be a problem.  but we actually started managing, he was he was selling beef, he was getting away his under thirty months.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Was he?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, with licence.  but then it turned out he was, he was taking them in the landrover up to Lockerbie, with a licence, I mean we were doing nothing, I mean you can\rquote 
t do anything else, and then it turned out Scotland closed the door and wouldn\rquote t have the English, especially Cumbrian in, so that caused another harrass, like you see then we went from D to E but it didn\rquote t, life didn\rquote 
t get easier.  but er, MAFF and DEFRA had muddled things up, we ended up with one D and one E licence which we shouldn\rquote t ha had.  they\rquote d given us two D licences which we shouldn\rquote 
t ha had, we should only have one.  and then they only gave us one E licence so, and I, I would love to show you it both, that,  because when I \lquote phoned to query why it was, it was because I had lost a D licence which wasn\rquote t true it was them 
that had made the mistake.  and I\rquote ve still got it, I says I\rquote m not parting with it but I will give you a photocopy.  but they weren\rquote t interested they would know.  so that caused all that, that wasn\rquote 
t moving, that was moving animals, you see that wee road th
ere? well that, you see that field at the other side was silage, and er, once it started to grow, you see, we, we were desperate for grass so we wanted to take them across the road and this was at the time we went from D to E so it should ha been simple, 
but it wasn\rquote t, they seemed to take ages to work out what the new rule was.  So it took ages to get them across the road, and it took even more to get them back
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right..........
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 And the neighbours said, he, he, the vet, I mean our, this would, this puzzled me as well, the market were working short staffed, especially in the office, the vet was definitely, was definitely working short staffed he\rquote 
s had to pay a lot of his vets off, well they went to DEFRA and, but he hadn\rquote t the work for them, so a lot of his, he\rquote 
s working short staffed, now our local vet could come within a couple of days to check animals that were, he always had to move .... and the markets the same, but DEFRA couldn\rquote 
t issue a licence for two weeks and yet they seemed to be overstaffed ...........
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 They had all these environment agency people working for them, they got, they got seconded so they\rquote re, they\rquote re. . . .. 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes but, Longtown vets were working short staffed but they could come in a day, or a couple
 of days to check the animals to make sure they could walk across the road  (laughs) and then, anyways, then we had to wait, rather a while, I think it was ten days to go that way and more than a fortnight to come back ................
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 What was it like when they, there was a farm quite close to here where there was a big pyre that went on for a long time
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Now now why did I \lquote phone, I \lquote phoned that neighbour to tell, about something I can\rquote t even remember what it was, but he said, you see, I don\rquote t know why but
 the way the wind was blowing it didnae seem to really hit us.  When we could smell the pyre, oh there was pyres, I could stand out here, you could see pyres, I think that goes away over Carlisle airport.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par You can actually see to Appleby, from here on a clear day
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right, and which ways Longtown is it that way
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Longtown\rquote s straight in front but you can see all the smoke, and Longtown houses would be, my, I\rquote ve got a daughter that lives in Longtown and they were stinking, oh dear
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 What was it like living, for her, 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh dreadful
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par What was it like, was she on the \lquote phone to you a lot saying what it was like or
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh no, no, no, no she\rquote s,  my family, they\rquote re, we\rquote re not like that you see this is the thing I, I don\rquote t think er, I don\rquote t think a lot about I said this to my sister-in-law and she says oh, oh it
\rquote s aged my husband you know, (laugh) but he\rquote s not, it\rquote s W\rquote s sister I was talking to,  her husband\rquote s not blood related to us.  but, I don\rquote t know, I always reckon this place, you have to be tough to put up with, (l
augh), the farmer that was in before W, was, in less than a year, in fact he was only in a few months and he resold it because his nerves were bothering him
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh dear
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 That was, that was nearly thirty years ago, so yeah.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 You must be made of stronger stuff then
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well I don\rquote t know, I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 But Longtown itself, I mean I remember you saying at the meeting that you found it, very difficult
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It really was dreadful. Well I didn\rquote t go in, you see I\rquote d shut off, the daughter in Longtown used to get my papers and she\rquote 
s been known to bring, come to the, the substation and walk along the road and threw the papers in, she was frightened to come, my kids, my daughter\rquote s were frightened to come, they didn\rquote t w
ant to bring the germ or take it away with them, they, they believed, I thought I wasn\rquote t allowed (laugh) but  er, the neighbour used to bring the papers. I\rquote m a hoarder so I didn\rquote t need a lot of, you know I didn\rquote 
t need a lot of shopping it was er, actually right at the very start when it first blew up, I went shopping then and that was, you know that was me,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Stocked up
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Stocked up, and I had a hoard before without that so I er, I er, apart from the weekly papers, \lquote cos I always like to read my Friday papers 
and that was the only thing I had to get the neighbours to get so.  Once I started getting braver I used to even drop homework off to kids from school, I did keep on working by the way.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right, so that must have been a palaver
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, that was something, it er, well er
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 They didn\rquote t try to stop you
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no they never tried to stop me and er, I did wonder \lquote cos there\rquote s farming kids in school, well there was a few actually got infected but from you know the other side of school, but er, I kept thinking if I take 
that and those poor souls, get it off me but I did, I\rquote d have felt very bad.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Did you, what effect did you think, did you feel that it had on the school and the children and the atmosphere and\'85?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It was a bit, it was, and yet they\rquote ve recovered well, one, on
e family that did get it and were quite upset, well they got it in Easter holidays, I think if it hit people just about the Easter holidays so they were out of school so we didn\rquote t see it, the teachers were very good.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Were they?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, and the headmistress told me I didn\rquote t need to go, she would understand that I er, I, again, I\rquote ve been brought up in a business family, I, if it\rquote s my work I have to do it. (laugh), I couldn\rquote 
t, I couldn\rquote t understand how the work would get done if I wasn\rquote t there, mind you we can all be replaced can\rquote t we?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh I wouldn\rquote t go that far
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Secretarial work that you do at the school, school secretary, so you\rquote ll know all the families quite well do you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes quite well, most of them, but you know, so anyways this one little boy that comes into my mind is recently, they were restocking and he was over the moon. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Was he?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 And they\rquote d been away, it\rquote s near the church, his place and they\rquote d been at, it must have been at Harvest they\rquote d been at church, no it would be Christmas wouldn\rquote t it, it\rquote 
s not, Christmas, they\rquote d been a church for a practice for the nativity play and he\rquote d actually saw some animals getting unloaded and he was over the moon
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 How old?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 He\rquote ll be eight I think
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm so yes, but it was sad, but its\'85 but some puzzle me they, they, they you know they seem to think getting into great things again, farming was struggling before this happened.  that\rquote s  what you know they\rquote 
re very excited about restock
ing but its er, its a long way, its still going to be a long hard struggle  for them once they get back into it, its this thing, the grass is always greener on the other side, you know.  Us that were left with the animals felt it must be lovely no to have
 to work hard (laugh) and they probably thought it must be lovely to have animals, isn\rquote t it,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Isn\rquote t it? We\rquote re never going to understand each other really its the grass is always greener on the other side
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB How do you think you would have felt if you had lost the stock, would you have thought of restocking? 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, I think, no I think my husband would retire
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB How would you have felt about that?}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par Well I think I\rquote d just, well we\rquote ve got three girls we\rquote ve nobody following on so, it is, it is a thought but however, I do wonder what we\rquote d do after working hard you can nay just close off can you (laugh) that\rquote 
s what would you do with your time once you finish?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So what was the worst thing about, about the whole crisis for you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well I think the time }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  had it . . .
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par . . .would probably be the very worst, but right, you see I still was worried about us getting it even }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 \rquote s wife used to come on the \lquote 
phone and panic before they got it, I mean, if she actually, I think she thought we were going to get it and it would go back to them, I always got that impression that you know that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm so did it actually sort of er\'85
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 We thought it was calming down and 
then somebody else away along there got it just at Easter weekend and that was it, that was it calming down once Easter came this, this area did start calming down, I look onto Longtown airfield as well which is a. . .
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 You said that yeah, is that
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No you have to look from the front of the house
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 What was going on there?   You said at the meeting there was something ........... 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well the story seems to be they burst the animals, at Longtown airfield, so they were bringing them from all sorts of places there to do something to em and then taking them away again. ..........
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Gosh
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And you said at the meeting that there\rquote d been something going on there recently with the lights on all night or something
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh yes, but that\rquote s, that\rquote s, that stopped about, that stopped just before Christmas.  the lights have, haven\rquote 
t been on really since, since Christmas, they would, they were cutting back there, whatever they were doing up to Christmas.  but the lights on at nights no, er, I don\rquote t know what they were doing but the lights were on all night.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm strange ......yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But they reckon they were, they had to get security on because some people were trying to get in to see what was going on, but I don\rquote t know that, it\rquote s a story.  that but I don\rquote t know what, I don\rquote 
t know what, I don\rquote t think they were working in there, sometimes you would hear, if it\rquote s a still night you can hear, you could hear a rambling on but I, I just, I have no idea what.......
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 When you say that the worst thing was when }{\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\f0\insrsid12189903  got it and you, then talking with }{\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\f0\insrsid12189903 \rquote 
s wife and, and also things to do with the neighbours, do you think it had an effect on everybody\rquote s sort of friendships, created suspicion or sort of had to keep people ...?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I don\rquote t think so, I don\rquote t think so, no I think no, not here, I know that friends, we\rquote 
ve got friends in Dumfriesshire who, we did eventually start meeting up for bar meals and of course, a lot of their neighbours who had been friends, they\rquote d went to school together, been friends f
or years, a lot of their neighbours, they did a lot of talking behind their back, but I don\rquote t think it\rquote s happened here .......it just er, but there is neighbour, I know that there\rquote 
s friends of ours in Dumfriesshire have had a lot of that problem.  but they, we kept in touch with them on the \lquote phone and then we did eventually start meeting for bar meals
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Sort of in between .. places............
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So did you \lquote phone bills go up and and your, your er
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I don\rquote t think mine have, I\rquote m very bad I don\rquote t think I \lquote phoned that many people (laugh). I don\rquote t know, no I think it was much the same my \lquote phone bill, aren\rquote 
t I dreadful?  I do know with poor }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  when they went down, I did actually, I kept \lquote phoning her you know, they went down and I kept \lquote phoning }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{
\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 , and er, as as I said I stopped \lquote phoning her when }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  went down.  Which was, I don\rquote t know, I don\rquote t know how many weeks, I\rquote 
d have to look for my dates I\rquote ve got them all written down but er.  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  at one point she said and my daughters, nobody\rquote s allowed in, my daughters, }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [neighbour]
}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  if you want something I\rquote ll meet you at the fence, I\rquote ll walk down the, just tell me and I\rquote ll just bring it down there they\rquote ll no see me.  (laugh) But she wouldn\rquote t you see she was frightened it
\rquote s just a but I reckoned I could walk through the fields an not get caught.  In actual fact, you see I wouldn\rquote t even needed to be on their land, the farms here are all divided wrong, W}{\b0\f0\insrsid11017238  }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
has a field that\rquote s just about into their yard.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Ah right
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Which it was a worry but yes, I say, they, they always reckon they didn\rquote t have it there that was a, we thought that would take us out, that was the first we just recovered frae that and then }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 
[worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 .
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 But er, it\rquote s it was, it\rquote s really sad the way they\rquote ve done it.  I know, again another lot in Dumfriesshire.  er, friends of mine who are not farming, stay in the bungalow that join on to this and they\rquote 
ve to put up with the smell of the fires and er, they culled out loads of big dairies round about Dumfries that were on, just on the three kilometres I mean they were right on the boundary, even across the river Nith.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 And they wouldn\rquote t let them, I mean one farmer actually went to court about it and he lost his court case, but that was that was because the law that week if it had been the
 next day they might have got off it was only the immediate neighbours
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB But I\rquote ve read people saying that they think that\rquote s why it stopped in Scotland was because they enforced that cull absolutely
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Aye but they only did it in certain places, you see tho
se friends ours they keep saying that, oh, they they that lost their animals you see I think it makes them feel better, oh and so and so took all them out.  and I says yes but how many did you take, they only took their immediate neighbours out, you know,
 if,  if they had went to three kilometres although they\rquote re unpopular as it is they would have been an awful lot more unpopular if they\rquote d been in taken out the three kilometres.  but they, they don\rquote 
t seem to look at it that way (laugh) and I\rquote ve got to be, I\rquote ve got to grit my teeth because I, I\rquote m, I\rquote ll always tell the truth I reckon but I know that I dare nay say it or they might fall out wi, you know there\rquote 
s so many of them.  but no, I don\rquote t know, I\rquote ve got other friends that you see, I know more about the Dumfriesshire ones, who live at Mouswald and it raged at Mouswald and yet there is two farms, you see they didn\rquote 
t automatically cull, there is two farms right in the middle of where it raged at Mouswald and they\rquote ve still got their animals..............and I 
spoke to one of the women and, when I was shopping in Dumfries recently and she, you know that, you know although you think how did we survive they, they were right in the middle and there was fires burning all round about them and they\rquote 
ve still got their animals and her husband\rquote s actually a contractor.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So he was in and out a lot
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well they mebbe stopped, I don\rquote t know, I, he possibly stopped going in and out then, I, hopefully I\rquote ll meet up with them on Friday night, we\rquote re going to Caerlaverock farmer\rquote 
s dance on Friday night so, this is an annual outing so I can usually. . .  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 There\rquote ll be some stories swapped then
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well this is where they\rquote ve all been (inaudible ) (laugh)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh really is it, yes
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 So, I, I, (laugh)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 You were saying at the meeting er, that on the roads going, as soon as you got over the border to Scotland, the roads were, all the er disinfecting and the, was much stronger than it was round here
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh yes, yes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And that round here there wasn\rquote t much
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, that is true ...
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And that seemed to, a lot of other people were nodding I remember you saying 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 That is true. Do you know I couldn\rquote t up towards Langholm, I, well I, my daughter went to work at Langholm so she knew.  I think, I wonder if it was this side or the other side of Langholm, I think it 
was mebbe the other side, but she knew whether it was she\rquote d been, or somebody\rquote 
d told her, I think she did, she had to travel from work you know, away on business, so she, I think she was through it but, her and I went er up in at the end of June we went to collect that youngest daughter had been abroad and we\rquote 
d to collect her at Prestwick airport. she missed the plane, she wasn\rquote t there (laugh) I tell you I could write a book, but anyways on the way up above Thornhill you know Dumfries Thornhill, there was this, you know, signs and I says Oh there
\rquote s been an accident, Oh don\rquote t be silly she says I see this at Langholm every day, and they took off, off the, through er, through a layby and it was flooded.  I actually it was very you know they really had went to t
own with it, same if where you go into Dumfries, they had one it was more a machine like the market, as you went into Dumfries,  but, at Longtown with all those dirty lorries, we had a mat and occasionally they lifted the mat and, it wasn\rquote 
t replaced for a few days.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah you said that
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It was just this silly little mat.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Weren\rquote t people asking about that why that wasn\rquote t?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well I think, I think they would ask the council, nobody seems to, I think they would ask the council but nobody. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Was there a lot of anger round here about er,
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Ah   Longtown airfield (laugh).
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah and er, and about all the dirty lorries coming from everywhere else
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
Yes, oh Longtown people were very annoyed at, I mean they were smelling.  I mean, they reckon they were being disinfected at Longtown airfield but they, if they were disinfected they were still smelling, what did they stay yes the wheels but the rest of t
he lorries probably weren\rquote t, they reckon they were stinking going through Longtown those lorries
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And did people feel that the communities round here were being put at risk by that?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mmm, mmm
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 By bringing in all those. . . . . 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 They did have an open meeting, they seemed to have a chap in Longtown who\rquote s very up on science, his father was a retired vet in Longtown so I presume he\rquote 
s, and he apparently went to the meeting and knew what he was talking about more so than Maff
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Is that Bell, somebody Bell, yeah?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, I forgot his name (laugh) I\rquote ve forgot his name but that\rquote s it yes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Were you tempted to go to that meeting or did?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Not at all because we were, that was before }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  got it but we, I mean that was, I, I\rquote ve never got, yours is the first meeting I\rquote ve come to, I\rquote 
ve always found I can\rquote t go to meetings because it could be somebody, somebody else could\rquote ve been there that\rquote s had it and I might be catching it, how do I know what I\rquote m bringing back from the meeting? but I did \lquote 
phone my daughter that you know, that lives in Longtown and said, Och cos somebody \lquote phone me to tell me about the meeting, and that\rquote s how I knew, it was very quickly organised and I, she was a very good at \lquote phoning and I said well I
\rquote m awfully sorry I just cannot come I.  I don\rquote t know who I\rquote m mixing with, isn\rquote t that rude (laugh)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And that\rquote s what it did to people wasn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, I said we, we\rquote ve got our animals here and I just can\rquote t get out, er, so I \lquote phoned my daughter and she said Oh I\rquote ll go (laugh) but apparently, now I must have got the m
essage the night before.  she went to work the next day and they were talking at work, people, she worked in Longtown and er, they were talking at work and they were all, so she went with here work mates.  she changed her, so she went, I said I hope you 
\'85 (whispering ) but my girls won\rquote t make a noise they\rquote re like my husband, mother\rquote s the one that makes all the noise
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Okay, so what did she tell you about the meeting?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Vaguely, I heard it more from other folk, you know,. she say, if somebody would tell me something and I\rquote d say oh yes I did hear that, but er you know she couldn\rquote t decide, I think there was so much arguing she couldn
\rquote t decide who was sorting out who.  She did know there was a man they just couldn\rquote t keep quiet and we pres, I presume that was Mr B, \lquote I\rquote m not finished\rquote  (laugh) he said, but as I say I would think he\rquote 
ll know about his sciences and his father is a retired vet so maybe his father had got him genned up  I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Well I read that his father had managed the sixty seven outbreak
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I would be a very good bet, he retired just as my husband came here but he would be, but a very well respected vet. I think he was a very good vet yes, mm
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So the the pyre, big pyre was stopped and things after that, were their small, do you know whether people were burying or burning round here?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Burning, burning,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Burning
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Well }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  that works here, his were taken away, there was another one that way, you see.  you kn
ow, this was, this is the worry how, how did it spread, us on top of the hill, we look onto, ............actually, I didn\rquote t think I would, I actually did put my camera down again but it wasn\rquote t that I wanted to take pictures of the fires it
\rquote s so that I can work out where, what different area it is (laugh) but you know it doesn\rquote t help I forgotten.  and actually I think I\rquote ve got some of those films, a film developed and it didn\rquote 
t really show in the sky, but it er, it is it\rquote s, it was very depressing looking out and getting another.  There was one lady I was sitting next to at the meeting and I, she lives over the Solway so I would probably see her fire as well.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 God, yes, mm, 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Very sad, it was very sad for them all, I did feel sorry for everybody that was involved, must be (inaudible ) but Longtown airfield oh dear.  but I, I use from the first day I said to my husband \lquote 
watch, watch that airfield \lquote and you know that\rquote s where they\rquote ve, did eventually try to arrive, but I don\rquote t know how they stopped them there.  it was sad that they picked, you see the, it\rquote s right, it\rquote 
s not far out of Longtown it was the same with Great Orton, it was very sad they picked areas where there\rquote s houses ........... they surely could\rquote ve found somewhere that wasn\rquote t in such a residential area. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Sounds like sheer anger stopped it in the end, the plan, the big plan for the big pyre
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, aha, (inaudible) drastic (laugh).  but er no the neighbour we\rquote d to talk, we\rquote d spoke to the neighbour, on I can\rquote t remember, I\rquote ll have to think about what it was 
or remember why we spoke to him and he, I think it was to tell him about this, the one, the one near the school, you see, MAFF wouldn\rquote t tell you, because of database protection they won\rquote t they wouldn\rquote 
t tell me who they, they phoned here on er, Friday was it the second of March a Friday, they phoned here to say that we were on form D and I said well who is it, who\rquote s got sent, I, it\rquote s confidential, we can\rquote 
t tell you.  So I went into school on the Monday, not knowing what form D meant, still not knowing what form D meant and I went shop, that\rquote 
s when I went shopping, as soon as we were into form D.  And I, and I went in school and two, not pupils, two staff said to me, Oh, what are you doing in, so I says well I\rquote m in form D but they didn\rquote t tell me I hadn\rquote t to co
me in so the headmistress says \lquote phone the helpline\rquote .  So I did, I phoned from school and the man on the helpline was very, was alright and he told me what I\rquote 
d read and, and he said, and stay, try and keep away from the farm involved and I said well that\rquote s choice (laugh) they wouldn\rquote 
t tell me who it was, well at that point it could have been either of two, but we worked out by mileage it must have been this way. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Did you, right
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Mind you, you with this three kilometres we reckon we were slightly out of the three kilometres the one that way so we worked out it was this way, so I started, actually I started driving past Longtown airfield, \lquote 
cos it wasn\rquote t in use then.  that was, that, I went a long road to Longtown, to stay away from this side
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So it\rquote s just a process of deduction really, what
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 So I had to keep changing my roads, to Longtown so that I was staying out of the way, anytime I went,  but again as I say I wasn\rquote t out very much, so er, but any. . . .
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Did it alter your sort of social life and going out a lot or would you not normally go out much?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Not really we, we don\rquote t normally you see we still mix more over Dumfriesshire.  Although we\rquote ve been here nearly thirty years we don\rquote t actually go out here 
very much.  but er, it was more work that kept us at home but we, we\rquote re always like this, in, this time of year, in the winter.  you just never catch up with it, but er, no it didn\rquote t it didn\rquote t affect, change that anything we\rquote 
d er, well we\rquote d been to Caerlaverock farmers just before it in the middle of January, so you know that was er, and then as the weather gets better we\rquote re still busy because you\rquote 
re preparing the land, ploughing and, it just, no social life.  (laugh) It just depends, we make an effort to go out but we\rquote re not, we don\rquote 
t go out to the local every week, on a certain day no, but er, anyways I had to, I had to learn again how to drive a tractor
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh yes, yes, because }{\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\f0\insrsid12189903 . . 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 (Laugh) oh dear it was quite. . . . .
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Did you feel any wear and tear on the system because of having to do the extra work or do you think it just made you fitter? (laughs)
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh no, no, yes ............I always say I came from a hardworking family so just, just have to grit your teeth, sometimes my bad temper, I can, I can kick, but quite , if something\rquote s getting me down I\rquote 
ll sort of stand up and look at my (inaudible) and think grrhh (laugh)
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Did you feel that was worse at that time?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no my temper wasn\rquote t that, but er no no, it just er I had sort of would just dig my heels, my daughters reckon that folk look at my eyes and they know, they know not to question what I\rquote m saying, oh dear no.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Did you miss going to the market
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Ah, my husband probably did I don\rquote t, I don\rquote t like markets
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Oh right okay
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I, I feed calves, to me this is a breeding farm.  I don\rquote t like seeing them going to market, even to, even to be sold on, I wonder where they\rquote 
re going to.  (inaudible ) those friends from Brussels they, a few years ago when they stayed with us, Watson had to go to the market to buy straw and they were here and he said \lquote why don\rquote t they come?\rquote 
 so, they loved it, but her husband\rquote s an antique dealer, so it\rquote s you know, it was just, it was dealing, it was, although it was different, he thought, they loved it and er, I, I just, I said oh I don\rquote t like that, no I very rare, I don
\rquote t like markets.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 No
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It\rquote s because you\rquote re parting with the animals.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Of course
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I much
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB You said he missed it
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes he likes, he likes going to take, he always went to talk to, mind a lot of it was old neighbours he used to go and visit, go and meet up with, the old ones used to always be there, but they\rquote ve all died so it\rquote 
s getting.  it was getting it the young ones don\rquote t seem to, mebbe the ones he knew and you know.  but no he liked to go to markets just to have a look and check the prices and that, he didn\rquote t mind going to them but no it\rquote 
s not my scene, however I do realise, it is complicated when\'85that has complicated farming life but they seem to think it\rquote s hopefully going to start up again, it was a bit sad, Longtown market got terrible, write ups about they\rquote d spread
\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Notorious
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I don\rquote t, I don\rquote t think they\rquote d done any worse than any other market and they\rquote ve started up at the same time as other markets, so I don\rquote 
t.  and, in actual fact the staff at Longtown market are ever so hardworking, you often see them there late Saturday afternoon and you know it seems to be a sort of, they\rquote ll all be shareholders, I think and t
hey all have to do you know, somebody has to go and be there. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Do you think it\rquote s got Cumbria\'85
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I did actually phone early on, I phoned Longtown market, \lquote cos my husband was actually selling animals at the market, do you know, this, when something drastic h
its me my mind does nay go, work properly.  do you under, and I knew he\rquote d been there the last week.  I knew he\rquote d been there one of the two dates and nobody got in touch with us, so I phoned Longtown market and he said \lquote well we don
\rquote t really know very much\rquote  but that they\rquote d been asking for, you know for the sheep, they were asking for sheep names but we don\rquote t know what they\rquote ve done about it, I said well Watson was there, well they haven\rquote 
t asked for that, and then, weeks later I was doing the books and I says, you  were actually there both weeks.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And they never came near you to ask you
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, no.
\par 
\par }{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12189903 JB Had you been selling there?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, but it was, we don\rquote t have sheep, it was under thirty months cattle he was selling, but he\rquote d been there every week, January and into February I think if you look back in the books he was there every week and that
\rquote s. . .
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So much for the news about all the tracing, you know
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 No, we never had, they never started looking at us until }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 .
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yes, do you think it\rquote s got Cumbria a bad name, all this?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 Probably, I think some of the vet, some of the foreign vets.  I remember saying to one foreign vet oh you\rquote ve no idea what we\rquote ve got to put up with, this is, you know telling him what they\rquote 
d been doing and he says you ought to work with them. (laugh), he reckoned and this\rquote ll be quite, well I told you this, MAFF has always been in my black books, as I say I don\rquote t like being, Watson\rquote 
s quite opposite from me he always thinks we butter folk up, I think just\'85 but they stopped him silaging three years ago to come and check, these animals and I, well she phoned me and said, I want to come tomorrow, well, \lquote can you wait\rquote 
, that was a Tuesday, \lquote can come later in the week, Thursday would be fine\rquote , \lquote I\rquote m giving you twenty four hours notice, I can come now,\rquote  and I says \lquote but he\rquote s silaging\rquote , that means he\rquote 
s got to stop tomorrow cos, we have to, the men have to help them to check the animals, you know, if they sent two, MAFF, I could help them, but, it was, it was a female and, and so they stopped silaging, they did \lquote cos he reckoned he wouldn\rquote 
t get his subsidies if he didn\rquote t stop, so he phoned them back after I\rquote d gave her a row. So anyways I was telling this foreign vet and he says you ought to he says and then we actually got, inspected about, they came 
about three times in two months that time. I wrote to Cunningham but I got no reply, I was so annoyed, er, I got no reply at all.  However he er, he, this foreign vet reckoned that they had a number, about even seven database programmes and none of them t
ie in with each other and that is where the problem is.  That was fact, you read in the papers that there was too many vets going to one, arriving at one case, and it was because those, database things hadn\rquote 
t tied up with each other, it was different departments that were sending
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right, right, goodness}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
\par 
\par But whether they\rquote ll every listen to that and sort it out ...
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Right, well is there anything else that we haven\rquote t talked about that you think\rquote s important?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I can\rquote t think (laugh) no, it just, as I say I\rquote ll be, I don\rquote t think it\rquote s affecting our bit but as I say we\rquote ve had to huh put up with a lot here.  It\rquote s a tough, you\rquote 
ve got to be tough to put up with it, I, I my oldest daughter was hurt in a farm accident (briefly upset here, moves on quickly) but, I think that was the worst thing.  My er, father and grandfather always said it\rquote s the, it\rquote 
s the humans, as long as the humans can survive, you know the animals haven\rquote t just survived, as long as it doesn\rquote t affect the humans too much
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 And do you think it did affect you
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It did a bit then, but you know as I say, you\rquote ve got to get up and get on with life haven\rquote t you, no, the first, until oh well, I don\rquote t know when I started calming down, July mebbe.  Once }{
\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  got back to help with silage it mebbe, sort of felt, I mean when he came you though oh, poor }{\b0\f0\insrsid10034901 [worker]}{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903  what will he bring with him.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It really was, but on saying that\'85 I don\rquote t know I think he\rquote s }{\b0\f0\insrsid11017238 a bit like us he just, but it\rquote s, }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 
his wife, it was, he said it was because somebody else was tell
ing her, she was believing what somebody else was passing onto her  that, that was when she was phoning, that was before they got it and phoning in a panic and and actually that same lot that were, continually, trying to stir things, even in, September wh
en it was sort of calming down the the husband for them you see he\rquote 
d lost his job because he was in, that particular farm, he was working on a farm that was anyway, so he went to work for DEFRA apparently, oh doing something, but he reckon, he was telling everybody in September that his job would keep going on, they
\rquote d told him that he hadn\rquote t to worry his job was guaranteed, it would keep going on for while so you see, and I says, ahh, I says I hope it\rquote s as good as his other stories because they\rquote ve never prov
ed right . (laugh) so I said if I get a hold of, well it was people like that that were causing the. .. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Yeah, mm
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 You know but, he reckoned that DEFRA, his bosses at DEFRA were telling he no need to worry about his job would keep going.  But hopefully they\rquote 
ve cut back and that same man was advertising looking for work in the papers so, shortly after that so I\rquote m hopefully was right (laugh).
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 Okay well thanks very much
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 It did get everybody, so, it\rquote s a strange thing, hm?  Hopefully next summer we\rquote ll get a nice, you see the weather was nice in the summer, when you have them lovely long summers and blue skies you don\rquote 
t worry so much, it\rquote s, it\rquote s dull depressing days that gets, that worry you.  so but we\rquote ve some dull depressing summers in years gone but hopefully we have another, a reasonable summer and we\rquote ll all get back to normal.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid12189903 So how do you feel about the future?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid12189903 I don\rquote t know, well you see as I say with having three girls who all have their own careers, don\rquote t think farming here, they\rquote re not farming minded.  I think it\rquote s had the opposite, they\rquote 
ve been, because, you know they found it too tying.  They like the other side of life, it depends, you see I, my family were haulage contractors who had farms, but they didn\rquote t work on farms, they 
had dairymen and I, you know when I went to young farmers it was that wasn\rquote t the thing to do (laugh).
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid12189903  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid12189903 
\par }}