{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{
\s18\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text 2;}{\*\cs19 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \sbasedon10 \styrsid16665073 page number;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}
{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1785296\rsid3480698\rsid3745437\rsid7292541\rsid7810747\rsid8078572\rsid9007173\rsid11096606\rsid12256098\rsid12528393\rsid16021036\rsid16665073}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}
{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min46}{\printim\yr2003\mo4\dy16\hr14\min4}{\version5}{\edmins7}{\nofpages64}{\nofwords35130}{\nofchars200241}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws234902}{\vern16391}}
\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1418\margr1418\margt1418\margb1418 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot8078572 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid12256098 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12256098 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12256098 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12256098 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid12528393 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid3480698 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid12528393 
\par Diary ID:       PM36}{\f1\insrsid12528393 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid12256098 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs21\insrsid16665073 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs21\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid16021036 15}}}{\cs21\insrsid16665073 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid16665073 {\insrsid16665073 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid12528393 
\par }{\ul\insrsid12528393 Information about diarist
\par }{\insrsid12528393 Date of birth: 1940
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 3}{\cs19\super\insrsid12528393 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs19\fs20\super\insrsid12528393 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid12528393  }{
\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 Group 1 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 Group 2 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 Group 3 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 Group 5 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid12528393 Group 6 }{\fs20\insrsid12528393 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\fs20\insrsid12528393 
\par }}}{\insrsid12528393 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }{\b\insrsid12528393 
\par 
\par Diary 1 (04/02/02)
\par }{\insrsid12528393 Wet and windy, I hear yet again about a disaster relating to F & M.  A farmer who has restocked has had to have an animal or animals destroyed because of T.B. is there no 
justice at all. My friend who did not go down with F & M but had to loose all his sheep through the culling system, amongst them were pedigree Leicesters of quite renowned breeding. Consequently he made more crop because he did not have enough livestock t
o eat his crop.
\par 
\par Tuesday back into work after my rest days. The merry-go-round continues, more farms coming back after F & M. This is good as it helps to secure everyone\rquote s jobs at the depot but it also causes p
roblems as I have to start and change loads round again. Wednesday, no yard man today, I had to go out of office and transfer milk from farm collector vehicles into reload trucks to dairies in Scotland, the North-East and Lancashire. Come back into office
 
later in day to hear more farmers are coming back next week. Really this is quite good but we are fast approaching overfill point due to shortage of vehicles due to cut backs caused by F & M. I am under the weather myself and all these F & M problems do n
ot help. One tends to get a bit depressed quite quickly. 
\par 
\par Thursday, computer classes this morning, that can cause a headache on its own. Hooray when I get back into work, I am greeted with news of more farms coming back but at least management are now thinking of bigger and newer vehicles to do the job well. 

\par 
\par Friday not too bad a day, informed of more farms returning shortly, more headache. Fortunately A, one of the DEFRA Field Officers called in at the depot, so I approached her to see if she would check 
and see if they were all sentinel farms. She checked on one of them for me and told me it was not. What a relief as I would have had to turn load completely round and altered collection times as farm would have had to have been at the end of the run, whic
h would have involved more time to collect load and more mileage involved. It has been confirmed tonight that we are definitely getting some more vehicles but once again it will mean a number of load changes, more stress and pain.
\par 
\par Saturday had a look at so
me ways of changing loads about, one day did not seem to bad but the next day was going to be difficult as quite a lot of farms are on alternate day collection. On has to try and get litres of milk near enough the same on each day or it causes an imbalanc
e
. I gave up in the end as I am still suffering from this wretched flu or cold, what with nearly a year of F & M problems and this together ones patience maybe is not what it should be. Getting ready to go home, nobody else left at Depot and a farmer rings
 to say his milk has not been picked up. I told him I would get there as soon as possible but he would have to be patient as all drivers had gone home (bloody drivers). Never}{\insrsid8078572  }{\insrsid12528393 
mind it was a wet dark night, could not see a thing at farm, they brought a torch and that was a great help.
\par 
\par Sunday, things seemed to be going wrong one after the other but I eventually get things as near normal again then things started to look brighter. I should have looked at some route changes but said sod it I have had enough for 
one week, it will wait until Monday as I had enough weekend paperwork to sort out. One wonders if things will ever get back to normal again or will we all go insane. I wish I knew who or what was really to blame. That\rquote s one week over. Hooray.

\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid12528393 Diary 2 (11/02/02)
\par }{\insrsid12528393 
Monday - things are going quite well today another farm coming back after F & M. Loads to alter again, more problems but never mind it is a step forward. Guess what a phone call about five thirty at night our promised fresh vehicles are coming told
 to get some loads sorted out for them. My thoughts were not at this time sorted out other end of day paper work out and went home.
\par 
\par Tuesday - we still have not got one of the reload vehicles back. Just going for service they said yesterday then they decid
ed to put a new gearbox in it, does not seem to matter that it is throwing the whole reload schedule wrong, never mind, I will work round it as well as sort all the load changes out.
\par 
\par Wednesday - area manager is coming I will have to get load changes for t
hese new vehicles sorted before he comes and vehicles come, they are due anytime now. It is lunchtime now, yes loads are sorted, will need some fine tuning but they will run and we will see how they run out. Five p.m still no new vehicles, are they really
 
coming or is this going to be a paper exercise. Guess what they have just come it is all hands on deck to get them sorted out, there is only me left bloody hell more frustration. Set the first one up, wonderful it seems ok, second one problems with lights
 when it is connected to trailer. Choice language from me and fitter, he finally gives up and says that it is wired up wrongly, British workmanship good eh. Park it up and take the four wheeler instead until it is sorted, later home again. Never}{
\insrsid8078572  }{\insrsid12528393 mind, there is always a good hot bath to soothe away the frustrations of the day.
\par 
\par Thursday - what a relief I am having a week off, at least someone else can have the problems to sort out. I will go to computer classes then call in at work, take mobile phone in no mo
re calls through night to disturb me for a week that in itself is a relief. Called in at work with phone and check that new vehicles were up and running. They had got faulty one sorted out and they were both out working, drivers seemed quite pleased with 
them and said they were quite powerful and well on top of the job. We will see when we put bigger trailers on them what their comments are, maybe not to be repeated.
\par 
\par Friday - another frosty morning not as hard as yesterday morning but at least it is better than all the rain we\rquote ve had lately, not a bad day, no pressure from work. Making the most of it while it lasts. Sorted out some Parish Council work instead.

\par 
\par Saturday - I intend to have a quiet day. Pop into Penrith to get a map photo-copied, called in to
 see my son who works for an animal feed firm says they are starting to get busier, things must be getting better all round, or is it all going too fast? Read in local press that some farmers who are going back into milk after F & M are favouring Channel 
I
sland cows, is it for better quality milk or do they think they will be cheaper to keep? Some seem to be increasing their dairy herds, others do not intend to go back into dairy. There appears to be farms coming onto the market for sale, some of the farme
rs have had enough and can see a way of getting out now that F and M seems to be gone away we hope. It is going to be a number of years I feel before things get back to normal if ever again in my lifetime.
\par 
\par Sunday - went to see my cousin who went down with 
F & M. We usually visit one another two or three times a year but F & M put a stop to it this last year. It has certainly taken its toll with them. Their son has lost five stones in weight, he is as lean as a rail it worries me. Their comments were yes we
 
have stocked up again, we have paid for them but they are not my stock. How many times have I heard this. You cannot blame farmers for saying these things as years of breeding has gone down the plug hole. No amount of money will ever replace some of the b
loodstock and years of breeding. Some people think the farmers were well compensated for their livestock, I do not think so.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid12528393 Diary 3 (18/02/02)
\par }{\insrsid12528393 Monday, had a ride over to Durham this morning, not too bad, traffic fairly light on the whole. Did not get the result I }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 ed when I got to Durham, but }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{
\insrsid12528393  all is not lost yet. Come back via Hexham, the wife and I had a good look around the shops, I really enjoyed the day away from all the pressure of work, it was quite relaxing even though I would be
 driving for just short of two hundred miles before we got home, it was a change for the wife. We had first auction sale at Carlisle today for a year. It was rather unique in more than one way, it was a landmark that things may be returning to normal. A l
ocal animal feed merchant who lives quite near to me was sponsoring the auction sale, some people will do anything to get on T.V. and get cheap publicity. }{\insrsid8078572 Never mind}{\insrsid12528393 , it is a move forward.
\par 
\par Tuesday quite cool first thing, called to see a farmer in my villag
e about some Parish Council matters, more moaning whilst I was there, they thought they had been badly treated compared to people who were unfortunate to get F & M. Yes I feel sorry for them but at least they have still got their stock left which they hav
e breed themselves, unlike the ones who have lost their stock. The times I have heard the comment, \lquote yes I have restocked, I have paid for them but they are not mine.\rquote 
 It makes you really sad and one wonders what the effect will be on peoples health in the long term.
\par 
\par Wednesday, went to help a friend do some gardening, it is great to be away from work, all the problems F & M has caused us at work and people round about work who have been indirectly affected. Guess what? We sit down for a bite of lunch and wha
t is the topic of conversation, yes F & M. You cannot get away from it, this disease or its after effects are going to be with us for a long time to come and I really feel that some of the farmers and people connected directly with farming may not realise
 how they have been affected mentally and health wise yet. This I am afraid will have a long-term affect on the country people of Cumbria.
\par 
\par Thursday, it is announced on the local news Radio Cumbria (who I might add did a sterling job when the height of F & M was on everyone\rquote s tongues at one time) that there is going to be a public inquiry by Cumbria into F and M. It\rquote 
s a pity the Government are not brave enough to stand up and be counted and allow an enquiry nation-wide, or are they afraid of what might come out. 
\par 
\par Friday we hear a sheep at Kirkby Stephen has tested positive with F & M antibodies on a sentinel farm. Oh dear, now we play a waiting game  to see what is the result of ministry tests, lets hope it is clear, we do not }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{
\insrsid12528393  to go through it all again. Another wet horrible day, wind, rain and sleety snow. I suppose February is living up to its name of February fill dyke.
\par 
\par Saturday, what a difference a day can make, about four inches snow had fallen through the night, a bit of drifting in places a
s well. Heard no more about sheep with anti-bodies at Kirkby Stephen or which farm it is at. Went out for a meal with the wife and another couple then called in on some friends on way home. Yes, conversation soon turned to F & M and how it has affected th
em on their farm and the hardships it has caused them, even though they did not get F & M, it has still taken its toll on them.
\par 
\par Sunday another wet and cold day but making most of it as I am back to work tomorrow. Not really looking forward to it. Once on a
 day I used to look forward to going back to work after I had time off, not now. I can only blame F & M and all the uncertainty it has caused. I even started to dream about work through the night and what routes would have been changed or needed to be cha
nged, it is a bit sad really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid12528393 Diary 4 (18/02/02)}{\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday, back to work, load changes to look at, more farms back or coming back after F & M. It is good news really. No yard man, had to help transfer milk, got soaked through. When I returned into the office,
 more load changes, when will it ever end. Another later finish, what a welcome back to work.
\par 
\par Tuesday, no yard man, got soaked very early today then went back into office to sort more paperwork out. Another farm back tomorrow but does not mean load change
s as it is one farmer going out of milk and another neighbouring farmer restocking after F & M with his neighbours herd. The area manager appeared with doom and gloom and how were we going to cope with all the extra farms that would be returning shortly, 
really is good but it all helps to cause pressure and tends to get you down a bit, a weaker minded person I am sure would crack up. I must admit I have felt a bit like that myself since F & M broke out.
\par 
\par Oh dear, tonight I hear on the national news there is
 a suspected outbreak of F & M in pigs in Yorkshire. Oh dear, I hope not because if it all breaks out again I feel our jobs will most definitely be in jeopardy. I have just put T.V. onto Teletext to check if it is really true and lo and behold it says it 
is in sheep, someone has got it wrong, is it pigs or sheep? 
\par 
\par Wednesday, watching breakfast TV before I go to work and they say it is sheep. It is still a worry which ever it is. I get into work and it is the topic of conversation with the drivers as they c
ome into work wondering if their jobs will be safe if F & M takes off again. It is quite a relief later in the day to hear it is not F & M.  One can do well without shocks and scares like this. Milk still going up. Farmers who have come back in after F & 
M
 their herds seem to be settling down now and producing more milk, quite good in some respects but it puts more stress on me having to alter loads again. Someone who does not understand milk collection may say what is all the fuss about but believe me one
 farms production increasing may mean that all loads are to alter not just one, and can become a headache as you cannot do load changes until all milk for the day has been collected and you know what lit}{\insrsid3480698 e}{\insrsid12528393 
rage is for the day and which loads can accommodate the extra milk.
\par 
\par Thursday computer class in morning \endash  not too bad this week. Get back to work to be greeted by top boss of Lloyd Frazer needless to say there is always some problem when these people arrive but fortunately I know what he was here for so it w
as not too much of a shock. Senior management went through problem with me then informed me they needed me to go to an unfair dismissal tribunal to represent the firm. Oh dear, F & M does not seem to be enough stress for me in their mind, so give him some
 more \endash  }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 , I will put it down to experience.
\par 
\par Friday rest day again, my what a short week.. I have a bit of a read of the Cumberland News and note the problems that the local enquiry on F & M is going to cause some people. Other farmers who are wri
ting to press saying that they have not been paid enough compensation for some of their top class bulls from which they would normally have made quite a lot of money selling semen to other sources to breed cattle elsewhere. It seems there will be cases li
ke this talked about for years to come.
\par 
\par Saturday, reading local paper again, this time the Penrith Herald and yes you can not get past something connected to F & M. The stress and strain this disease must have put on some people may never be really understood for a long}{\insrsid3480698 ,}{
\insrsid12528393 
 long time. Went with a friend in the afternoon who has a HGV of his own. He was taking a load of Barley to a farmer at Garrigill which is the other side of Hartside fell. Naturally we got talking about F & M and the extra feed he has had to
 use as he did not get F & M,  but obviously he had been restricted as to movement of livestock which had caused him and other farmers round about him problems. He also said that he had heard of farmers who had got F & M, the compensation they had got had
 
only helped them to pay off their debts at the bank and there was very little left to stock up if any as we all know farming has had a lean time this last few years caused by BSE and other things like the green pound and over production. F & M may have gi
ven some of them time to sit down and think what their future farming pattern will be, some may not go back into farming at all.
\par 
\par Sunday, had a quite day. Was going to watch Country File on TV to see what the weeks  weather for}{\insrsid3480698 e}{\insrsid12528393 cast  was going to be and see
 what was being talked about in the farming world about F & M. Same old story, I got involved in with something else and missed the programme. Never mind, we don\rquote t have to eat, sleep and drink F & M day in, day out, it\rquote 
s nice to have a break from it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 5
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Monday.  Well it is the start of another week.  The Wife keeps }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 sneaking}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  a look at these Diary\rquote s I am doing and says I do not know how people can read your writing and some of your }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 spelling}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 (Its not that bad is it?)  I have had another quiet day at home started to sort my greenhouses out for }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 spring}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  but I am afraid the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 enthusiasms not there this year yet butt}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I am sure it will be as things improve after F.M.  My friend has started lambing he lost all his ewes through the culling system but was able to keep his }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 sucker}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 cows and calves.  He has bought Welsh Llynes back in he tells me they will be easier to look after and lamb.  Seems quite a change to Pedigree Blue Faced }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Leicester\rquote s}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
.  But like everyone else perhaps he sees the need for a change in his way of farming.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work after my days off yes you might think I have been off a bit lately it is just time that has built up without realising what with F.M. and one thing and another you do not realise until senior management says you have so
 many days to get off before the end of March or you will lose them you think bloody hell they have had enough blood sweat and tears of me this last year I am going have them.  The wife and I sat down and watched the Program}{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 m}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 e Rural Lives on Border T.V. after our evening meal.  It was really quite touching as it was the Armstrong family from Blunderfield who got F.M. early on.  They had filmed it all from begi}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 n}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ning to restocking again.  What brought it more to us they were now farming at Blunderfield which was a farm once owned by my wife}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 \rquote }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s family and it was sold to the Armstrong family quite a number of years ago.  Her parents had to sell the farm because of ill health to both her farther and her brother or who knows it may have been them with F&M.  I can as}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 s}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ure you it brought tears to our eyes again just as it did when they rang me to say do not send your tanker driver in for Milk tomorrow as we have got F.M. it may seem silly but Blunderfield still feels part of us.  I can tell you I spent many happy days 
there when I was courting my wife and helping on the Farm after we got married in}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
fact most of my spare time was spent there nearer to the time when it became more difficult as her Farther and Brothers health got worse.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  No yard man again today
 did some office work then went out and set empty trailers up for reload went back into office until farm collection vehicles to come in to of load into Reload Trailers spent most of the rest of day down in the yard.  When I fina}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 
l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ly got finished I went bac
k into office to find my office colleague was fighting with more F&M. changes.  If anyone had told me in November December there was going to be as much milk now as there is I would have laughed at them and said ru}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 b}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 bish just shows how wrong you can be.  It would ap}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 p}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ear farmers coming back in after F&M are concentrating more on milk and less on sheep.  Whilst others are not even coming back into milk and others taking the op}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 p}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ortunity to get out all together as I keep saying this farming disaster is going to 
cause problems to a lot of people and businesses before we are allowed to forget it if ever I also feel there will be lots of heath problems to come yet mostly stress related.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Had morning off going to computer classes seems simple to some not to me though modern technology and me does not always agree.  Then it will be back to work this afternoon and no doubt more load changes due to F&M. farms coming back.  Rea}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ly we should be thank full that it seems to be over and lets hope it does not break 
out again.  I just still have that feeling that it will start up again in odd spots lets hope I am wrong.  Yes I am back to work to find my colleague in office changing loads again milk is rea}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ly going up fast it makes one wonder when it will stop never mind we seem to have it sorted for now lets get the rest of work sorted and go home my mate has al}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ready done a disa}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 p}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 pearing trick quite early in the afternoon.  Good eh.
\par 
\par Friday.  A nice quiet day things seem to be going quite well today is it because I am on my own.  Oh dear I thought is was too good more farms starting back.  I will have to do some more ju}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 g}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
gling with farms.  These ones look fairly easy for a change.  Not a lot to report today.
\par 
\par Saturday.  A horrible morning snow & wind otherwise all drivers seem quite pleased with load changes what a su}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 r}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
prise.  Then head office came on to say they required extra reloads put on over week end more problems short of reload trailers none available at the other Depots.  I eventua}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ly got enough to see me through but oh dear what a job no one }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s to part with a trailer in case they have extra to do.  Never mind I got it all sorted and went home after 07-00PM what a long day.
\par 
\par Sunday.  What a change a day can make yesterday it was snowing to day it is Pouring with rain.  No farms ringing up peace Perfect Peace no load changes to make.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 it is quite dull make the most of it while I can.  Time to go home still nothing out of the way I can not believe it lets go home when it is quiet.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 6
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Yes yesterday was too good problems by 08-00 more farms }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ing to come back after F&M.  One of them without prior warning.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Usually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 when they come back in we get at least a weeks notice which gives you a chance to move farms about on loads to bal
ance things out oh well just another challenge.  I went out with one of the farm collection drivers in the afternoon to assess him on his driving and to see if he is doing his job correctly at farms as I am one of the Company Driving asse}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 s}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 o}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 rs.  I have to do this at least once a year.  What a change at some of the farms especia}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ly ones that have had F&M.  It is a shame that it takes a disaster like this to get some of the farms cleared up you would think it would be in there own int}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 e}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 rests to keep things cle
an and tidy.  I know most of the farms on}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 this run and they all greeted me in a very fri}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 e}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ndly way pleased to see me.  Needless to say my driver passed with flying colours.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Another great day weather wise but that is all.  Loads that can not be un
loaded at dairies too much milk I guess if only dairies realised how much disorganisation this causes it quite quickly brings things to a stand still because you can not get trailers back for loading.  Guess what head office rings up to alter every load f
or to morrow Wednesday I am sure it is some sort of a game with them }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 the main cause is there is too much milk about who would have thought it after all the live stock that has been slaughtered with F&M. another trying day at work.  Gone 07-00PM befor
e I finished.  Got home and sat down for my evening meal and watched Rural Lives once again it was explaining the hard ships caused by F&M. it is sad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to see the hard ships that some people have encountered.  Then it }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  gets to me when the people in the tourist and Hotel trade says how much they have been hit }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 especially}
{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  when you read how much they have lost it is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 phenomenal}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I honestly think if some of the farmers could make }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 half}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 or even a third as much as some of these people in the Hotel and Tourist trade say they have lost the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 farms}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 would be highly delighted.  Who knows it may make the Public realise Great Britain is only a small island but with out the farming industry I am fully confident it would collapse as I am quite certain farming is the b
ackbone of this little old country and that is not being biased what ever anyone else might think.  Now I am going to relax for the next Eight days I am catching upon some more time of which is due to me hooray.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Had a nice quiet day at home.  
I even cut the lawn it was looking a bit ragged and uneven so I thought what the hell it is a bit early but here goes I set lawn mower two notches higher than usual and tidied it up it must have caused an infection with in an hour of me cutting my lawn an
other two lawn mowers had burst into life cutting Lawns.  The local }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 i}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 nquiry into F&M seems to be winding down I wonder what les}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 s}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ons have been learned.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Spent most of day in Garden sorting things out in Green houses }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  for some soil from a local building Plot for one of the Green houses so that I could [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
text missing \endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ].  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to see my brother and his wife later in afternoon my brother was not at home his wife said he was at implement sale at Carlisle Auction.  He only has a smal
l amount of land and they have decided to Grass let it all they lost all their livestock in a contig}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 uo}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
us cull as their next door neighbour got F & Mouth.  They are both past their sell by date so decided to sell most of their implements as they would not b
e needed again so thought they would cash them in as let them lie and rust he seemed quite pleased with the prices he got for them when he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 arrived back home.  It is rather sad in a way because I do not think he would have given up if it had not been for F&M. but I think Farther Time had caught up with him and now was as good a time as any to pack in.  We then called on a }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  who had gone down with F&M who were in the process of changing farms when they got F&M. which }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  put a block on thei
r move to the fresh farm.  They did }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get moved and as the farm they had bought was a clean farm they were allowed to shut up with out any sentinel herd.  Which was quite a relief to them.  They were in the process of altering the Silage Pit when we got their di}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 g}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 gers in moving earth leve}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ling ground etc it is nice to see some one going forward in a positive way.  We then }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to see my sister and her husband at night they were in quite good spirits but were both talking of easing up or retiring.  A
m I the only silly one in the family who will not admit time is catching up on us all never mind we eventually got home and the wife and I thought we had had a quite rewarding day one way and another.
\par 
\par Friday.  Could not wait for the Cumberland News to se what was in about F&M }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 i}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 nqu}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 i}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ry I was quite }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 disappointed}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I thought ther}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 e}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 would have been more in it was obvious if there was another out break of F&M. it would more than likely be the same old merry go round again it gave me the feeling there had not 
been a lot learned which would help the farmers.  We also read in national press that people are still being allowed to bring raw meat into the country unchecked does this gover}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 n}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ment think if they do nothing about this it will just go away.  I sometimes wonder if it had not been for Bin-Laden and his terrorists F&M may well have been still with us.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Had a look round the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 S}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 aturday Market at Penrith Auction Mart it was quite dead I thought lots of stalls missing it does not seem to have been the same since it started up again after F.M.  }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to funeral in afternoon it was the wife of a local farmer who had }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 tragically}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  died from cancer }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 there}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 was a lot of farmers there and the topic of conversation was obviously F&M. between farmers who had had F&M and were stocking up again.  The thought of some of the farmers it would be a long time before there would be any fat stock 
sales at the local Auctions they would be used for Pickup Points for }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 moving}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  on to slaughter houses instead it is sad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 as the farmers are not getting the true value of their }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 furnished}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  stock this can not help them to go forward in a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 very}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 
positive}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  way.  We }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to see a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 at night who works for a farmer that had gone down with F&M he said they were restocking sheep every where he thought possibly more than they had before F&M. they were also restocking with quite a lot of feeding }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Geese}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Suckers}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .
\par 
\par Sunday.  Had a quite morning jumped on push }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 bike}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  popped to local village shop and got a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Sunday}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  paper had a quiet read.  Then a bite to eat }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to see my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  down village who has a small holding had a bit talk about things in general.  It all helps to 
life the doom and gloom of F&M.  Whilst we were sitting talking a local feed merchant called in to see him.  Obviously the conversation got round to the hardships F&M had caused him.  He }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 has a farm and visitor centre at Langwathby he is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 always}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  brave e
nough to try a new venture his latest idea is to milk sheep and make cheese so he would take us down to see Milking Parlour he is on putting in to milk sheep it looked quite impressive but there looked as if there was a lot of work to do yet before it was
 into working order the dairy side and cheese making plant had not been started on yet but he was quite confident it would be up and running in a week to ten days I doubt it though but it rather nice to see some one going forward.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 7
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Monday.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  back to Doc\rquote s for results of tests done at last visit not too bad but that did mean I had not to be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 careful}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  He told me I would have to change some things in the way I lived and learn to relax a bit more.  Spend the afternoon in garden sorting flower beds out and weeding just a general }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 tidy}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  up.
\par 
\par The News on T.V is full of the vote in Parliament on fox hunting my feeling is why change the way of hundreds of years of country tradition because think what people like it is still the most humane way to keep a chec
k on the fox population after all they are just vermin even though they look quite a handsome creature of the wild.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  We are welcomed on T.V that the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 government}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  had voted to ban fox hunting but it still has to go to the House of Lords if they have
 any sense they will throw it out.  Today I have a planning officer coming to look at a possible building plot as my daughter and her husband are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing to build a house the price houses are getting to my son in law thinks he can build a house cheaper but I am going to check with local planning officer before we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 commit}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 ourselves to getting plans drawn up to have our hopes dashed to say we would not be allowed to build on this possible site.  Good }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 news}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  planning officer says there will be no problem with pla
ns to build on site at least something goes the right way for us.  Rural Life is on T.V. again to night it is interesting to watch and see how F&M has }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 affected}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 there people and what they are doing to overcome their problems it was based mainly on Dumfries Auction Mart and the hardships it has caused them as an auction company }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 saying how it had been so hard to go to Farms to value their stock before being slaughtered and the long hours they had been putting in dealing with problems F&M. had caused them.
  I know how they felt having gone through this at work having to console farmers when they rang up to tell us they had gone down with F&M. on many }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 occasions}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 I would put phone down shed a few tears then I would pull myself together take stock and get on with what was to do.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Had quite a bit of rain overnight the good weather we have been having this last few days could not last }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 indefinitely}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  I was talking to a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  today who was telling me had heard of a lot of sheep being slaughtered at a farm but it had not been publicised so has it gone away or is it still here?  Then we hear }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 Brucellosis}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  has been found in livestock that has been imported from France and they try to tell us these foreign }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 countries}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  are squeaky clean and free form these }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 
horrible}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 diseases it just goes to show we can not afford to relax in any way it seems we are not allowed to relax or have a bit of peace seems we have got to suffer the stress and traumas for a long time to come.  The Doctor seems to think the stress I have had 
with F&M may have a bearing on my health problems I am having time will no doubt tell.  I am back to work tomorrow after my few days off so we will see how it goes.
\par 
\par Thursday.
\par [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Page(s) missing?}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ]
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 8
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Another fine day spent most of day doing odd jobs in garden having a general tidy up.  I had been at Dr to get results of tests that had been done not too bad I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 feel better in my self.  Is it the weather or is it because people can see the doom of F&M beginning to lift a bit of both I think not a lot to report today really.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Just a normal day not a lot happening today.  Had a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  and his wife called to see us at night who is a local farmer and yes conversation got round to F&M. a
nd how it had caused him a lot of hardship how he had been forced into keeping more livestock on his farm because he could not sell or move it about because of F&M. and how it had cost him dearly for extra crop and feed.  It is sad }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  because he is such a jovial chap norma}{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 l}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ly.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Got some real farm yard manure for my vegetable garden and Greenhouse.  As the day wore on I began to think about going back to work and what changes there would be with farms coming back after F&M.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Yes I am back at work and my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 colleague}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  in office is full of doom and gloom does not seem to }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to do anything but talk on phone.  Never mind I will get on with my work it nice to hear the drivers say I am pleased you are back.  Lots of route changes with farms coming back on after F&M. but it is nice and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 very}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 encouraging}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to see progress being made most of farms that are returning are producing more milk than before they got F&M. it seems they are concentrating on one thing instead of two or three ways of farming there }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 hard}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .
\par 
\par Friday.  On my own at work today it is much easier when you are left to your own it }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 allows}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  you time to sort problems out without anyone interfering.  No load changes today but plenty to d
o for load changes on Monday.  I get phone call from Defra to say some of the farms that have been sentinel farms are now clear this helps greatly as it allows us to pick farm up as we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 without leaving sentinel farms to end of run.  I am }{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  told one of our bigger producers is leaving us at end of month and going to another dairy company.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Sorted routes out for reload did rest of paper work then started to ring farmers in preparation for load changes on Monday and Tuesday to tell them they w
ere going to picked up earlier on later in day needles to say the ones which were going to be picked up a bit earlier were not too pleased.  But I calmed them down and they saw it my way I hope.
\par 
\par Sunday.  To day }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  well but far more milk than I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 what for Reload I do not know where it is coming from.  The next thing I will be short of trailers then to put it all out of }{\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 sync}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 I get some load changes but I got it sorted and all running back to normal I hope.  I am not looking forward to tomorrow as I know I am going to be short of trailers for reload never mind that is another day another cha}{\f0\fs24\insrsid1785296 l}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 lenge.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 9
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Yes it is back to the grind get all the reload sorted out and looking not too bad then I am informed they were going to put more milk to depot for extra reload but no destination and no extra trailers.  I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 finally}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  get destination given but all the rest of }{\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 dairies}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I should have been sending milk to were all changed as well but no extra trailers to do it with got it all sorted even }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 spirited}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 a trailer away from another Depot with a bit of soft talk.  Now I have to start and contact driver to tell them they have different destinations and starting times for to morrow.  I get this sorted and about }{\f0\fs24\insrsid16021036 midday}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I realise we have some diesel stolen I have to dip holding tanks too see how much has gone then I inform Area manager and anyone else concerned then ring Police they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 arrive and take statement and finger prints and ask how much has gone I tell them 2637 litres quite a lot }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  I h
ave been here for thirty two years and never known fuel being stolen before.  I am now contacting local engineer to see if he can make tanks more secure said he would call in at Depot about 1800 hr to night yes he did come we had a good look at holding ta
nks and we both came up with some idea to make it more secure said he would call in Tuesday and do it just hope they do not return to night for another go.  Never mind it is a change not to be fighting F&M. problems.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Another bright and dry mornin
g no rain it all helps to lift the gloom of the aftermath of F&M when the weather is fairly good.  The day is progressing fairly well then guess what reload destinations have to be changed I just wish some of these dairies would get their acts together an
d make their minds up how much milk they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 need.  Having said that there does seem to be a glut of milk around at the moment.  I think part of it has been caused by farmers having to hold onto stock that they would }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 normally}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 have got shot of other than milking them another backlash from F&M.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 farmers that are starting back after F&M seem hell bent on either catching up on lost time or determined to produce more milk than they did before F&M. as I have said lots of them are concentrating more on milk
 and increasing their herd sizes.  The Local engineer has arrived to make diesel tanks more secure.  I will go out and see what sort of job he is doing and I will have to go and get a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 secure lock.  When I come back from getting lock he is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 finished}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  just waiting for me to produce the lock to see if it fits believe me if the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 villains}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 come back they will }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 struggle}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to get into the tank this time.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Guess}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 what it had to happen.  One of the farm collector drivers rings up to say he has run tanker over and put milk through vac }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 muter}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  too much milk and can not get it all on all tanker full we have to wait }
{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 until}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  first farm collection vehicle comes in part unload him then send him out to pick remainder of milk up needless to say he is not a happy }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 crappie}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 unfortunately this driver }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 seemed}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to have the roughest time when F&M was causing all the problems so here again we have someone having to suffer even though F&M. seems to have ceased as I keep saying people will be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 affected}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 for a long time yet and these problems do not help ones health as you can not switch of and relax as there }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 always}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 seems to be another problem waiting round corner as soon as you solve a problem another comes along.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  I am having the final two days of }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 holidays}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  of today and tomorrow as I have to take them before end of March then I follow this up with my weekend of so I do not go back in }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 until}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  Tuesday.  I read in press that the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Brigadier}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  is going to stand on the F&M hearing for Cumbria but will he
 gagged or will he be given freedom of speech I wonder.  There was one thing that came out on Rural }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Life}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  Programme on Tuesday on T.V. in my mind it was David }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 McLean}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  the only politician that spoke any sense and proved he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  understood what was going on 
if people had listened to him when F&M first broke out would we have been in the state we are in now I may be wrong but I think not.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Spent a bit of time in Greenhouse to-day pricked some seedlings out }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 isn\rquote t}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  mother nature a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 wonderful}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  thing we so
w the seeds and watch them grow into flowering plants and I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 suppose}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  in a way nature will take over and see us through the after math of F&M.  The wife and I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to see my brother and his wife at night and I saw they had got the Magazine called }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Cumbria\rquote s}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  S
tory which is a diary in a way which has been produced by the local press I feel it will make some very interesting reading and maybe some things will be printed that will haunt Defra.  You can rest assured I will be getting a one to read and then put awa
y in a safe place so that it can be got out and read in years to come and let our children and grandchildren realise the damage F&M. did to this county.
\par 
\par Friday.  Planted }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Tomatoes}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  plants in Greenhouse that I have heated the other one I tend not to heat if I
 can help it.  But I did change the soil in unheated one and set some hardier plants out in it.  Anyone with a greenhouse must be prepared to give it a lot of time I sometimes say they take more looking after than a baby.  But there is on thing I will say
 it does help you to relax and gets you some }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 relief}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  from the stress of F&M.  I have }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 cut lawn again to-day quite a lot of grass on it so things are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  beginning to grow.
\par 
\par Saturday.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  and had a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 looked}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  round local Saturday }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Market}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  at Penrith it is 
a long time since I have seen as many people there }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  lots of stalls there that have not been there for a while it seems some of the traders that have been missing since F&M. are returning which is }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  good.  There }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  seemed to be a lot of people there that appeared to be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 holiday}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 Makers so yes the tourist trade is picking up again }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 infect}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I thought the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 market}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  was }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 vibrant lots of people there lots going on.  So we will get back to normal }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it is just a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 pity}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  F&M has done so much damage a
nd affected the Farming community\rquote s way of life and caused so much stress and ill health.  I fear some people may never }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  get over it properly.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Easter Sunday }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to Easter service at local Church quite a good turn out and a nice service.  At least we have some lambs }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 running}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 about in the fields this year last year at this time they ere few and far between it is nice to see things recovering.  Some farmers are even starting to put their milk cows out to grass something the ones who still had l
ivestock left were reluctant to do this time last year.  Ploughing and seed sowing seems to be going ahead in our area with a great deal confidence it is nice to see farmers being so positive after such a trying time that they have gone through this last 
year.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Fertilizer}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  being spread on grass land with great gusto no doubt preparing for silage time.  These are very difficult times for farming and anyone }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 connected}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  with it and believe me there a lots of people directly or indirectly realise this I think farming would ... [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 end of sentence missing \endash  bad photocopying.}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ]
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 10
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  I contacted my brother and brother in law to tell them I was going to do something to our Parents Grave as it had sunk down and looked bad and was making it difficult to keep tidy we arranged a time met up and I took some soil we cut turf on grav
e and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 rolled}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it back then put soil in to level it up it looked quite tidy when we had }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 finished}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  Then we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  and had a walk along fell bottom and had a look at my old home where my Parents farmed for over fifty years unfortunately most of the buildings have now been turned into }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 dwelling}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  houses sad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
.  I often wonder what my Farther would have made of all this F&M I think it would most likely have put him of farming for the rest of his life if he had still been alive.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work to find the merry go round has not eased of one bit.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 
As far as load changing goes and farms coming back into production it is more difficult as we have two drivers down in Worcestershire training drivers as we are taking more work on through a merger with another Mi
lk Cooperative if the merger goes through it will be good for us as haulers and farmers as it should help to keep milk prices up.}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par 
\par Wednesday.  These route changes are becoming more difficult as there just seems to be les
s and less room for movement from one route to another and still squeeze it onto available vehicles it is starting to look as if we may have to start a night time collection so that we can use the vehicles again at night that have been used through day fo
r
 milk collection but this will mean more reload tankers to empty milk into and may mean some one coming through night or early in morning to empty vehicles so that they can pick milk up through day.  I know I have said it before but F&M has a lot to be bl
amed for production of milk was more steady it was more on a level field.  But now farmer seem hell bent on producing more milk than ever especially the ones who are coming back in yes F&M has and will cause problems for a long time yet.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Another
 great day weather wise now what joys have we for today more load changes quite easy to-day for a change.  But unfortunately a local is not producing this week and yes you have got it one more milk for reload I hope we have plenty of dairies to take milk 
to and plenty of reload trailers for us to do work with I start ringing senior management about lunch time I don\rquote t think they are hearing me no joy by time I go home yes I blame it all on backlash of F&M.
\par 
\par Friday.  A bright and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 sunny}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  morning it helps to lift ones spirits even the drivers are smiling do they know something I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 don\rquote t}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ?  No not }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I think they are feeling more secure by the day as more farmers come back as it }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 makes}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 Depot more viable.  I am still trying to get more reload trailers still no one listening but they will have to before day is out they are starting to }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 panicky}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 they realise I do need more trailers or things will come to a halt early tomorrow.  Sat 7.30PM.  I have finally got both Operational mangers }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 panicking}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  now.  It is sad that it takes a day and }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 half}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to take notice.  08.PM.  I have }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 finally}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  won I am going home now not looking forward to Saturday.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Had a restless night wondering if tractors would turn up in time to get morning loads emptied with no hold ups.  We }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 struggled}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  at
 first then trailers started turning up much to my and yard mans relief I only hope one or two more turns up }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 shortly}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I have }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 finally}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 won through the day got all milk of loaded.  }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid12528393 Now}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  milk movement starts }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 running}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  up to change destinations for some of loads se
ems there is so much milk about dairies are fast becoming full to overflowing but I do wish they would shout before this time of day about 05-00PM.  I have finally got the day in and am going home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  I have not been in work five minutes a reload driver rings me to say dairy he is at does not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 all the milk we are sending them a bit short notice when you have three tankers sitting at dairy waiting to empty ok well let milk movements sort it out it is there problem and will no doubt be mine soon }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 having}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to reroute vehicles to other dairies.  Driver rings back to say they are going to try and empty them all.  Things are running more smoothly by lunchtime then a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 frame}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 rings me to say he is ready to start back after F&M in the next day or two and I feel there will be more before the week is out but dare I say it I am }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 half}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 prepared for it and do not think load change should be too difficult.  I knew it was too quiet I am }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 having}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to reroute some of the reloads dairies full up but I am trying to stay calm an
d smile as if the stress of F&M is not enough.  F&M has something to answer for the problems it has caused us all.  Well problem sorted now normal services resumed let me get out of this office and away home it is Sunday night WHAT A WEEK.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 11
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monda
y.  Another hard frost but never mind it will bring a nice day but it back to the grindstone no rest for the wicked.  Put tyre on one of reload trailers just got it sorted and one of the farm collection drivers rings me to say he has burst a front tyre on
 his vehicle is this going to be another of those days.  I have rung tyre company to go to him but he is now running late farmers will be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing to start on his last run of day they will all be to ring and inform he is going to be running late still no news from police about theft of diesel last week that is no }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 surprise}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
.  Thing seems to be calm at moment or am I speaking to soon.  Field officer contacts me about more incomers after F&M where is all this milk going to go too.  Now Milk movement ringing me at
 04-30PM starting to change all the destinations for reload vehicles.  I will have to contact drivers as they have gone home some of them will be in bed by now as they are going out }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 half}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 way through night so that milk can be at dairies for 06-00 in the morning and some of them have quite a distance to travel to deliver the milk isn\rquote 
t life a ball.  07-00 I am sick and fed up I am going home and see what tomorrow brings.  Who ever or what ever started F&M has a lot to answer for because I blame a lot of this 
over production on F&M and it will get worse when farmers turn their cattle out to grass.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  in early this morning one of the office clerks was not coming in so I promised the other girl I would do what we call the D600 and D601 on computer th
en fax them to Head Office I am afraid I am not as quick as the girls on computer but I am getting there.  Next thing was sorting all the <}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 unclear word, about 7 letters \endash  chityrs?}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
> for tomorrows reload destinations sorted as I am going for a medical to get
 my L.C.V. licences renewed this is to do every five years after you become forty five or over even though I am in office I still have to turn out and drive a vehicle if we are short of drivers }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 being on of company driving assessors I have to keep my h
and in I have one or two more things to sort out before I go for medical whilst I am away area manager is going to hold the fort.  Needless to say I have got through medical alright.  I began to wonder at one stage if I would what with all the F&M problem
s one tends to get stressed up very easy and it can send ones blood }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 pressure}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  up but no not mine quite stable }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
.  When I get back to Depot I find I have had a spare reload trailer delivered to me from another Depot thank god for that it will help to get
 me out of a hole.  Other wise things seem to be going quite well bloody hell someone must can read my thoughts from a distance Milk Movements have started }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 riming}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to change reload destinations cant leave well alone whoops they have just rung back to say put it back to what it was ah well.  Looks as if I am going to have a reasonable finish to night.  I have spoken too soon phone is ringing I pick it up here }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 goes}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  yes a reload vehicle has broken down belonging to one of the private hauliers we use can I help him out sorry the answer is no I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 neither}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 have the vehicles or the manpower to do it.  I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 already}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  have men working rest days and I did not say it but I would not be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 using}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 him if I had tractor of my own.  Never mind with a bit of }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 juggling}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  of loads we sorted i
t out now I am going home because I live there even though the wife sometimes wonders.  I might get rewarded some day.  HA HA.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Oh it is just great I am still }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 swapping}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  reloads about this morning then just when I get it all sorted I check empty 
reload trailers that has come in through the night and a trailer that has been lost since early march has turned up.  The haulier that brought said one of his drivers had come across it parked up at Manchester I wonder?  As if we had not enough sorting ou
t to do with farms coming back after F&M.  I go out to a farm who has suspect antibiotics in his }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 folk}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  tank get there test it and it is OK no need to dump milk.  When I get back to Depot men }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 running}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  about like }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 headless}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  chickens on of the yard men has pulled a reload tank out of C.I.P. bay after washing it but has not }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 disconnected}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it from C.IP pumps so they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 alkies}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 up the yard behind him.  We had to get local engineer to come and sort pipe work out and electrician to repair electrics.  The poor driver that did is saying }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 don\rquote t}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 tell me of just get on and sack me my reply was do not be so silly you did not do it on purpose.  He is one of the drivers who }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 seem}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to have }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 possibly}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 been more upset with F&M than others I told him to settle down we have all been under enough stress lately with out }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 making}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  himself worse.  It all got sorted out and working then I }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to him and said see normal service has been resumed again and he thanked me for being so calm.  Must have been one of my better days.  There has been no load
 changes on reload side no alterations on farm collection side but I know there }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 are}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 more farms coming back near or at the weekend after F&M.  Where or which driver will be able to put them on there loads I do not know never mind it is just another part of 
the problems F&M has caused we will all look back and laugh about the problems it has caused us maybe one day if the stress and problems it has caused does not kill us of first.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Computer classes this morning so I have had a good start sorted al
l reload duties out before I go and hope there is no changes before I come back.  Some hope.  Well I am back computer class over learning how to use internet and send Email note I said learning I did not conquer it by any means never mind back to grindsto
ne yes there has been some changes sent through for reload destinations seems there is too much milk about and no where to put it.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Dairies}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 are full and overflowing.  Then I get a phone call to say there is another farm coming back on after F&M.  Which farm collection driver do I put the pain on this time it turns out not too bad a little bit of }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 juggling}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  a farm or two round on to different runs and it all fits poor drivers we are now }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 commenting}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it is worse than when F&M was on they say we thought we had got 
over the problems and stress but no we seem to have got over F&M but the stress is still there with the problems that it is causing as they come back into production my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 replied}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 is it will get worse and go on for a long time yet so we will have to try and grin and bear it little do they know how near I have been to throwing the towel in.
\par 
\par Friday.  Another bright day this weather is great if it was not so frosty at nights still I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 suppose}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it will be helping to keep milk production down a bit.  Heaven help us w
hen it turns warm at nights and all the cows are out to grass day and night.  What a change from last year to see so much stock about in fields and so many sheep and lambs it seems most part farms have restocked fairly quickly which must be helping people
 to get over there problems and get back to farming there land again still I wonder what the long term }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 affect}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  will have on everyone.  A fairly quiet day at work no problems.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Another fairly quiet day at work even though we have increased the reload destinations things are going fairly }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 smoothly}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  even the drivers have a smile on their faces to day which is nice }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to see some happy driver again after all the stress and uncertainty we have gone through not a lot to report to day is it too quiet?
\par 
\par Sunday.  Things are running too smoothly for my liking there is something going to go wrong I can feel it in my bones.  Fortunately we are quite busy again today so that is helping to keep me on my toes and look for things that might go wrong and try to p
ut things }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 right}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  before they happen if only it was that easy.  Well night is here nothing serious gone wrong dare I go home yes I will chance it.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 12
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Start of another week the other chap who is in office with me is back after a weeks holiday 
so no doubt it will not be long before we are back to doom and gloom.  I am sure F&M has got to more than some even though he has no real feeling for the farming }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 community}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 or the problems it has caused to some.  I sometimes think what }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 he would}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  have been like if he had had as many relations and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s as I have that have had their farms affected by F&M.  Even though I say it myself I think up to now I am taking it fairly well.  Yes it had to come before the day was out I think we should do this or that inst
ead of leaving things alone and settling for a day or two so my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 replied}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  is do what you }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 if you think it will help as I intend to go home early and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 also}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  have Tuesday & Wednesday off if that is okay with him as I have gone fourteen days without a break. 
 He just gave me a blank look then said I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 suppose}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  so.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  What a glorious day I am going to put my garden in it is such a nice day at least I will have some good old fashioned farm yard manure this year to put my potatoes in with.  No one could move
 farm yard manure about last year but now that F&M has gone things are better and things turning back to normal.  Got the onion sells in early potatoes in so I am now going to prick some seedlings out into boxes in greenhouse.  It is a change from last ye
ar even a change from a month or two back the old enthusiasm is beginning to return.  Likewise you can see a spring in the farmers steps every one is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing to get on I only hope no one gets there hopes dashed lets hope we have seen the last of F&M.  We have a small grass letting in }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 village}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 tonight it will be interesting to see what it makes this year after we nearly had to give it away last year yes what a change it made quite a good price and I feel it will make even more next year if things ... [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 text missing 
\endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ]
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Not quite as good a day weather wise but we should not complain it is better than last year both weather wise and no F&M. to contend with pricked some more seedlings out in Greenhouse it has now got to stage wh
ere both Greenhouses are full to over flowing.  More and more farmers are now putting there }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 lives}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 stock out to grass what a change from last year and all the empty fields and smoke from pyres.  We are told through the media that European Parliament represe
ntatives are coming over from continent to look into F&M for them selves I wonder if they will be }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 allowed}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to have a free hand or will they be steered the way our }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 Government}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s them to go and who they are able to speak to.  I would like to see them speak
 to farmers and people in the real world who have been affected by F&M. and just see how it has caused hard ship to so many people and businesses but will they?
\par 
\par Thursday.  Back to work.  My mate has really got a cob on has he lost the plot I hope not I ge
t duties sorted out reload destinations sorted and some more paper then I go down to yard to see him before I go to my next but last computer class and tell him I will be back about lunchtime he doesn\rquote 
t look to me to very calm still has a cob on.  Oh dear I warn girl in office she says don\rquote 
t worry I will cope.  When I come back from class sure enough I am told he has lost the plot so I have a bite to eat and a cup of tea then go and calm him down he seems alright then a driver comes up and says I am pleased
 to see you back that other chap has lost the plot can\rquote 
t agree with him self oh dear I say just ignore him he will come round before night.  I just leave him and get on with some load changes because we have more farms coming back after F&M and the milk is
 still going up as more farmers are turning stock out to grass.  Never mind another day over every one seems to have calmed down so it is time to go home so I tell my mate to have next day or two of and I will see him again on Monday morning that brings a
 smile to his face.
\par 
\par Friday.  Another day dawns none of the drivers have complained about load changes which is a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 surprise}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I think they are beginning to realise there are going to be load changes quite regular }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 until}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  things settle down and all the farmers who are going to come back after F&M are back in production again.  I have a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 nether}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 farmer ring me up to say he is starting back next week with almost as much milk in one day as he was producing in two days before he got F&M. so that will be another farmer increasing his herd size }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 where}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  will it all lead to I feel it will only help to bring the price of milk down which will help no one.  I wonder what the members of the European team will think of this and what their recommendations will be as far as increased
 milk production will be I think they will take a dim view.
\par 
\par Saturday.  What will go wrong to day nothing I hope things will be normal.  But no driver come up to office to say you will have to change my loads again they are full.  The problems F&M has caus
ed even though people who do not understand the workings of the farming world think it is all over now I can }{\f0\fs24\insrsid3480698 assure}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 you it is not it is still causing problems and headaches to people who are involved with farming in any way but it can only get better.
\par 
\par Sun
day.  I go in to work to find one of the reload tanks has not gone to its destination.  I contact contractor who is supposed to be moving it.  He says there is a driver coming to collect and deliver it so I get on and sort out Mondays reload duties and ch
a
nge one or two of the farm collection runs before drivers say they are full again.  How much longer can we juggle farms round before we need to put another vehicle out.  I feel have long past this point now.  The drivers had enough to put up with when F&M
 was at its peak without all this chopping and changing they have now had over a year\rquote 
s stress and problems all brought on by F&M.  Mid morning still no one arrived for reload milk I contact haulier again he assures he will deliver it before day is out my reply is it should have been delivered at 08-00 this morning.  He }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  arrives for it.  The yard man then comes up to say there is two same day loads still not gone so I ring contractor who is supposed to be moving them and he says sorry I have made a
 balls up and routed his drivers wrongly but he is sorting it out and they will get delivered and yes they do }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 turn up I now have to contact Dairies to tell them milk will be late but they are not too worried as they have been having problems as well.  Then to finish day off I have a vehicle broken down at Gimson [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ??}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] in Scotland where do I find a mechanic at 07-00PM. on a Sunday night I wonder but yes I do I got an mechanic from Strorraer to go and repair him I get a phone call at about 09-30PM. 
to say he is repaired and mobile again.  Hooray.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 13
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Doom and gloom is back into work again to day he may be a bit brighter but as I confront him with all the load changes we are going to have to make on farm collection side his face starts
 to drop.  But no doubt we will get through the day oh dear now they are ringing up to ask us to alter all the reload duties from to day when half of it is already delivered never mind that is what they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  so we will have it to do wherever possible hopefully that will suffice but no they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 Tuesdays deliveries altered not once but five times they ring to alter the destinations.  There is more milk in the country than people know what to do with it and there are still a lot of farms to come back yet afte
r F&M. to cause even more headaches.  Never mind things get sorted }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  by night.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Today we are going to get sat down and do some massive load changes on farm collection I am afraid there will be some unhappy drivers but what can one do whe
n there is a shortage of vehicles I think I could get a job in circus juggling the way I am having to juggle these farms about I am becoming an expert.  Guess what Area manager rings to say there is a vehicle for us if we go to Macclesfield for it so I ar
r
ange with area operational manager to pick me up early in morning and take me for it and we should have it back at depot by lunch time I am not refusing it as it will get us out of a hole 18-00 hrs at night ready to go home phone rings more load changes o
n reload side I sometimes think they expect us to be there twenty four hours a day but yes it will have to done so I have to start contacting drivers who are going early in morning to inform them their dates has changed.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Really}
{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I hate doing this as sometimes they have gone to bed as they are starting early next morning sometimes midnight or soon after so that the milk is at the dairy for them to start processing never mind what has to be has to be.

\par 
\par Wednesday.  Here goes I am in at work early to do a bit of
 paper work before area operational manager he is a wee bit late so I get on quite well.  He eventually turns up we set of nice bright morning at Penrith but we are not far down motorway until it is raining.  As we get farther down it brightens up again a
nd the sun soon shines through.  We meet up with a driver from Maclesfield at Jcn 18 who then takes me to Maclesfield to collect vehicle.  Guess what it is not ready when we get there but it gives me a chance to get a bite to eat and a cup of tea.  I }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get vehicle and set of home have a good run back put vehicle in garage when I get back for a check over all O.K or so I am told.  Yes there has been more load changes on reload for me to sort out but never mind it keeps me out of mischief and has rela
xed me a little bit having a run out and getting an extra vehicle it gave me something to think about other than load changes and F&M recovery night time comes of I go home in quite a happy frame of mind.
\par 
\par Thursday.  I come in early as it is my last computer class this morning and I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 as much done as I can before I leave someone to hold the fort time I am away.  But no such luck the vehicle I brought back yesterday afternoon is still in yard driver having problem with it }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 I give up with it and 
tell him to take another vehicle.  I then contact operational manager tell him we have got a duff vehicle he arranges for someone to replace it with another one until someone sorts it out for me.  Now I have farmers ringing me up to say they have too much
 
milk to stay on alternate day collection oh bloody hell more changes just when you think you have got farm collection out you have to start again sod it I am off to computer class I will sort it when I come back.  I get there late and soon start to wish I
 had not gone at all computer does not seem to }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to work for me or is it me being uptight and not relaxed enough.  Stress half the country does not know how it can affect you but rest assured I do.  Never mind class over back to work no it has not improved since I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 away but never mind I get a phone call to say my sick vehicle is sorted I now have two extra vehicles to use good eh.  I now feel I have done enough for one day then a vehicle breaks down can not get it unloaded onto reload vehicle then whe
n we do we can not get any paperwork out of the vehicles Macs computer so I can not do my end of figures it is my week end of starting Friday morning so I ring someone explain all problems I have had today and apologise for leaving things in a mess and te
ll him I will be back on Tuesday if I do not go to commercial motor shows at N.E.C. Birmingham if I do it will be Wednesday.
\par 
\par Friday.  Just my luck weekend off I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to finish putting garden in I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to go and rotovate Son in laws garden.  Have a fence to
 repair at local school.  Then go to my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s and rotovate his garden but it is raining but I think it will clear and yes I was not far wrong it does clear out I get the rest of my potatoes in get son in laws garden done go to repair school fence and it pours down.  So can\rquote t [}{
\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] until it fairs up and get it done go home have a meal then go to my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s who is a farmer who had F&M. last year.  I get his garden done time they were having their supper as they have ju
st finished milking then I have a look at new silage pit they have been having built yes they are like all the farmers who have come back into milk after F&M they are producing far more milk than they did before F&M. when will they ever learn.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Not a bad morning the wife and I go to local market have a look round don\rquote t by much call to see my son then return home.  Cut the lawn.  It is my Birthday so we decide to go out for a meal with two }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s of ours have a very nice meal then have a quiet ride some of the local villages along the fell bottom and reminisce as we go along it brings back our younger days.
\par 
\par Sunday.  I spend all morning in Green houses sorting plants out watch Grand Prix in afternoon then have to go to Carlisle at night
 to meet manager of Lloyd Fraser (Bulk Liquids) who is staying in hotel the night we are having a talk prior to a tribunal hearing next day as we have sacked an employee and he has brought a case against the company for unfair dismissal it is a long drawn
 out evening as we discuss things with Legal Beagle.  I am not looking forward to hearing tomorrow.  Never mind one can only tell things they way they happened and hope we come out of hearing with our heads held high which ever way it goes.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 14
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Here goes of to meet the professionals at hotel have breakfast with them after having called in at Depot quite early to collect some more evidence for the tribunal we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get to place of hearing get briefed on our wrights and wrongs.  I am not l
ooking forward to this at all we get under way it starts to turn nasty then an adjournment is asked for then in we troop again.  Get geeing again then adjourn for lunch I fear this is going to be a long drawn out thing.  Off we go again now we are getting
 down to it but alas not for long another hiccup another brief adjournment then come back again it is 15-30 in afternoon by now and getting no where fast finally proceedings are halted and hearing is adjourned until September oh }{
\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid12528393 bloody Hell}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  What a long stressful day I am knackered and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  stressed out today.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Decide not to go to Commercial Motor Show at N.E.C. so go to work instead things not too bad but I have a lot of things to sort out for next hearing of tribunal I know it seems a long way off but it is no good waiting until last minuet then look
i
ng for things I would rather have it all sorted out now and pieced together and see if there is any missing links that may help us.  Not a lot to report otherwise other than milk has increased even further over the weekend where is it all coming from.  Mo
re phone calls to say more farmers are coming back after F&M.  Where will it all end.  I feel we could have done without all the stress F&M. is still causing us even though it seems to have gone away we hope.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Yes it is another day it seems to h
ave been a short night I wonder what joys await to day here goes I turn the key in office door.  Glance at the fax machine yes there is something there I ignore will it go away I doubt not.  But never mind I go and check all reload trucks have gone check 
f
uel figures get down to some paper work then take a sly look at fax machine on well I had better see what it is that has come through during night guess what it is a load change for to days reload deliveries.  Get it sorted and put to bed.  Now I can get 
down to something else.  One of the farm collection drivers ring up to say one of his farms has too much milk to stay on alternate day collection he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s to be collected each day.  What is wrong with them all since F&M. they all seem to me to be on a self-
destruction course by over producing milk it is almost more stressful than when F&M was with us at least we knew the milk would either drop or stay stable for a few days but now it just seems to go up and up and one does not know which way to turn.  I am 
o
f to Carlisle to get some vehicles updated from 26 tons to 25 tons then we can get some bigger trailers for farm collection and see if that will help to solve problem.  I am now back at Depot sorting loads out again I can not believe it yard man comes up 
t
o say he is running short of milk for reloads I say do not worry it is there it is just not coming in fast enough.  Although on checking I fear we are going to be short night comes and yes we are oh hell.  This leads to a few frantic phone calls it gives 
m
e a bit of pleasure though to make office at Milk Movements realise what it is like when one has to change loads at end of day and rearrange things but no what do they do but say let it ride until to morrow I wonder what they would do if I said that every
 time they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to change destinations.  I am now getting ready for home and the engineers come up to office to say they have checked one of farm collection vehicles and it not safe to go out until it has some major surgery.  Where do I get another farm col
lection trailer at this time of night I am in luck one phone call and I find one just needs picking up so I ring driver concerned and arrange with him to collect it early in morning so that he can get on with his duties tomorrow now then quick get geeing 
for home before anything else goes wrong and gets me all stressed up then I will not be able to sleep night all.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Yes another day has come and gone I sit hear weighting this diary and I say to myself what am I doing this for then I decide if we h
ad not had this dreaded F&M it would not be necessary but I suppose it may be of use to someone in the not too distant future in research into how stress from things like this and other epidemics that can simply devastate a country as small as England in 
such a short time and can have an affect on so many people and businesses that some will never recover again.  It is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 sad.  Now back to what has happened at work to day instead of all this doom and gloom.  Well not a lot }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  destinations for Reload milk did not come through until 14-00 hrs a bit late }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  for telling drivers what they are doing next day.  I am told it is to avoid last minuet load changes that\rquote 
s a laugh within the hour of getting them I have two changes of destination that is not a
ll 18-30 at night another good job the driver was in a good mood when I rang him good job it does not happen to the same driver every time other than that it has not been a bad day weather wise and lawn at home was dry enough to cut and tidy up again for 
a
nother week.  Milk is still going up maybe not as fast we are also informed we have more farms coming back next week after F&M. no they have not all started back yet by a long way it is also heartening to hear we are starting to get some auction sales of 
livestock starting up again but I fear it will never return to normal for a few years yet.
\par 
\par Friday.  Once again the weekend looms upon us again things are quiet at work to day milk still going up it did ease for a couple of days but it seems to be away agai
n only one change on reload destinations to day that makes a change having said that I did give a hint to head office that the reload drivers were starting to get sick and fed up of all these late load changes maybe they have listened to me.  But I doubt 
i
t I think it is just coincidence.  Well I suppose it will be a bit different to bank holiday last year, especially for the tourist industry people will be able to walk on the fells again this year and also the foot paths that cross over farm land will be 
o
pen to the public again although I still feel the tourist industry was not hit as hard as the farming industry and I am quite certain they are getting over the problems caused by F&M. much quicker than the farmers are.  I read in local news that a farm th
a
t I know very well as I grew up in the area and know the family very well have sold their farm by public auction for one and a quarter million the reason why they sold their farm was they got F&M. and just could not persuade themselves it was the Wright t
h
ing to do to start up again as they were getting no younger and thought now was the proper thing to do as farming is in a bad way at the moment as it is.  I feel the good days of farming are over for the time being but it will pick up I feel sure given ti
m
e to get over F&M. and also all the red tape that seems to be affecting farming at the moment.  I fear when you look around at some of these farmers there is still a lot of stress affecting them from F&M. and I may be wrong but come the autumn and back en
d there could be a lot of stress related illnesses before we are through with the aftermath of }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid12528393 F&M.
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Saturday.  Yes it is the start of another day of toil and pleasure we will leave the pleasure bit out of it drivers ringing up to say their loads are full s
o I have to start to do load changes on farm collection duties.  I think I have cracked it and another driver rings up his load is full where do I put it this time I now have allowed three loads on the flush vehicle and it was thought I could [}{
\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 unclear \endash  clearfflush?}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] with one and a bit loads a day oh well wrong again.  Now milk movements are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing to alter reload destinations what do I do never mind night is here all problems sorted for now and I still blame the aftermath of F&M for most of the problems it will get me yet if I am not careful.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Oh dear what a day milk still going up and to make things worse I have reload vehicles standing with loaded trailers and no given destinations and no one willing to give me any destinations too much milk and
 not enough destinations . I finally get some destinations from reload at about 13-00 hrs not good enough.  Bloody hell 13-30hr and they are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing to change them again how much more of this I can take I do not know.  Never mind it all brings night and helps to keep a crust on the table.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid12528393 What a week phew.
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 15
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  One would think things could get no worse ha ha.  I came in did some paper work made a cup of tea and down to do some work on computer.  Phone starts ringing first one thing then anot
her loads full reload destinations not been given it is now 13.30 I decide it is time to have a bight to eat whereas my cup I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 a cup of tea as well I find it near computer only half been drank of it from first cup I made this morning first thing I knew
 had been busy all morning but I did think I had time to drink at least one cup of tea but it seems not.  Then a driver comes up in a bit of a state his farther has taken ill so I tell him to get sorted out with his vehicle and get him self away home and 
get down to the Infirmary he rings me later at night to say he is rather better and he will be in morning so at least there has some good come out of a very trying day me.  If this a Bank Holliday I do not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  another like it never mind night is here again.  What will tomorrow bring?
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Two of us in office to day good we will get down to some big load changes.  The phone ring more farms starting back later this week after F&M. but not such a bad on whole I decide to go home early.  It is our local P
arish Council open meeting to night I am reflected Chairman again much to my wife\rquote s dissatisfaction as I had intended to give Chairman\rquote s post up oh well more earache dear oh diaries me.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Short of Yard man today so we use a driver and I decid
e to go out on farm collection for a change I quite enjoyed it but I had to come back into office when I had finished picking milk up.  But it was nice to get out and have a bit talk with farmers and let them tell me how F&M had affected their lives it ha
s
 certainly given them a chance to clean their farms up and do alterations which would never have got done under normal circumstances but it is sad that such a terrible disease like F&M. has to bring these changes about.  The local enquiry into F&M now see
ms to have got into swing now lets hope they can learn something from it.  The farming world and this country and especially Cumbria can not stand another disaster like this again so let\rquote 
s hope we can learn something for the future and help prevent such a disaster again.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Start of another day has dawned on my own again the other chap in office said he was not going to be in to day but waited till last minuet to tell me last night before we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 home but I suppose that\rquote s life I will just have to ge
t on my own.  But at least I will know what I am doing and there will be no moans and groans and belly aching in fact it will be quite peaceful I hope.  Well it will be until milk movements start ringing to change destinations we should have gone for a ne
w tank for farm collection to day but it is not completed yet some modification to make.
\par 
\par The milk is still going up where is it all coming from it makes one wonder if there would have been as much if we had not had F&M.  I think not.  Oh dear it has caused
 lots of problems one way and another and still will for a long while yet.  Never mind we have got through another day with not too much stress yes we still have lots of problems that are F&M related and believe you me one could crawl up in a corner somet
imes but you have to put a brave face on and try to be as calm as possible which is quite difficult at times.
\par 
\par Friday.  Hooray it is my weekend off no phones ringing no saying my load is full you will have to take a farm of no reload destinations to change.
  No I can not sit down and relax car to take to garage for a check over lawns to cut Greenhouses to sort and have a general tidy up at home.  But it is nice to be away from it all even though it is still sticking in the back of my mind what will happen i
f F&M did break out again.  I feel it is too early to relax yet despite what some people say.
\par 
\par Saturday.  I have to mend a kissing gate on foot path that goes through some fields in village now that F&M has died down people are using foot paths again and co
mplaints have come to Parish council that kissing gates need repairing.  Look happy get it done then every one will be happy it has not been as big a job as it looked at first and at least it will get the waging tongues of my back for a while until they c
a
n find something else to complain about.  Farmers seem to be starting first cut silage a bit different from last year when they were running over the fields with toppers to keep the grass down it must have been a blow to the sales of fertilizer.  As I kee
p
 saying more than farmers had a set back and I still feel lots of people will never properly get over this horrible disease.  The local enquirer is still going on I just wonder what the final outcome will be I only hope we can learn something from it and 
some good can come out of it.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Church this morning my Granddaughter is getting christened to day then there is a small party back at my house after service it makes a change from office no one talking F&M just a nice }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ly talk and it is nice to see the children playing out side on lawn not a lot to report to day I am just having a relaxing day with family and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s it is great this no problems no worries.  Good eh.

\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 16
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  The start of another day all the fun and games of yesterday
 over so I will have to have a bit tidy up in garden and put some bedding plants out of Greenhouse to harden them off ready for planting into garden.  The wife seems never short of something for me to do she never fails.  As the morning draws on I start t
o
 think about going back to work as I have to go on a course today even though it is my day off no rest for wicked is there.  The course goes quite well and I go back to depot a little wiser than I was this morning now the problem starts how to get it over
 the drivers but I will no doubt just before I go home I am asked if will go and collect a new rear steer trailer for use on farm collection to morrow of course I jump at the opportunity to get out and view the country side as I drive down the Motor way.

\par 
\par T
uesday.  I do not go in to work to early to day as I may have a <unclear two words> due to having to wait for a vehicle to go and collect new trailer.  Spend what is left of morning sorting load changes out so that new trailer can operate right away provi
ding there is no problems with it I get vehicle to go for trailer about 14-00h of I go to collect it get back about 19-00h.  I am now going home I fear this farm collection trailer will cause some headaches to morrow I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to be prepared for it.
\par 
\par Wednesday
.  Go in early get new farm collection trailer washed out yes sure enough can not get it to make a vacuum to suck milk out of vats at farms back to drawing board send driver out with smaller tanker then let the fitter loose on new trailer lots of head scr
a
tching cups of tea phone calls I think they are beat but no they prove me wrong and finally get it going.  Now to see which farms it will and will not go into because of its extra size I think we may have problem but of the driver goes with a fitter sitti
n
g in with him in case of problems but no they ring up to say all is well and driver is amazed how easy it is to get into farms with when the rear steer back axle cuts in all goes well until last farm they try but there is problems not enough room to turn 
in yard.  But they get out again }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  with no damage done.  We ring farmer to apologise but he is not too worried and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s us to go out to farm and see what alterations need doing so that we can get in with it quite a change from some when they se th
e size of it if only they would realise if we can operate with bigger vehicles it should make haulage cost cheaper and it will help to get them a better price for milk and god knows they need it to help catch up on all that has been lost with F&M.
\par 
\par Thursda
y.  Wet morning milk still going up drivers grumbling because of load changes and farms still coming back after F&M is it worth it?  I wonder I still blame F&M for all this upheaval to farming industry and anyone connected directly or indirectly with it a
n
d Defray still looking over our shoulders one can get quite frustrated at times but you have got to try and let no one see how it is getting you down or drivers will be quick to catch on and try to take advantage of you so it is best to go walk about and 
settle down again.  We seem to be putting far longer days in office with all the changes that have to be done and this does not help things either bloody F&M.  I wonder how many times a day I say this to my self.
\par 
\par Friday.  The start of another long day ever
ything seems to be going wrong that can go wrong antibiotics in milk tests to do but they pass them drivers ring up to say they are full or milk has not been cooled down to Wright temperature at farms why the hell did I come in today.  But never mind I ev
e
ntually get things sorted and things get back to as near normal as possible HA HA.  Everyone gone home I am here sitting sorting paper work and figures will not add up yard man has not had his adding brain with him to day when he has been loading into rel
oad tanks but yes I find it after some cursing and checking and double checking scratching of my head now I feel a bit hipper I can go home with a clear conscience and know it will not be to sort out in morning.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Driver moaning one in particular 
asks me if I am taking the piss the dates I have given him to do he does not think his load changes are Wright but I tell him to get on with it and give it a go so of he goes grumbling to him self so I tell him to think himself lucky we still have jobs af
t
er all the F&M and not to make all the problems that it has caused us any worse.  He just gives me a dirty look and jumps into his vehicle not a happy chappie little does he realise I will still be here sorting things out to night and he will be long gone
 home but as the saying goes you can please some of them some of the time but not all of them all of them the time least of all him he is always complaining but I get through the day with not too many load changes or alterations to reload destinations.

\par 
\par Sun
day.  All the drivers are of out no complaints what difference a day makes.  I knew it could not last one driver rings up milk is to warm to pick up yes it is a farmer who has come back after F&M and of course he is producing more milk than he did before 
F
&M so obviously his equipment is struggling to cope.  Phone rings again it is Mr Grumble he has broken a spring oh hell I have no fitters on a Sunday to call and no spare vehicle.  I ring another depot to see if they can help me out with a spare vehicle y
e
s they can but how can we get it here they volunteer to bring it over to our depot for me they get it here and my driver gets back to depot and not too much time is lost.  I have a bit of juggling with loads because of breakdown but it is not too bad and 
I get all milk picked up.  I even have a reasonably early finish if 18-15 is early for a Sunday night.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 17
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  I must be mad to come in to day after the weekend I have had but never mind at least I will have 
help to day as the other supervisor is back in to day but no doubt he will be moaning about something no not too bad but once again he seems to sit all day pondering over load changes and no nearer at night but never mind what ever turns you on I suppose.
 
 Then he starts panicking it is nearly night and lots of paper work to do he thinks.  What does he think I have been doing all day I have been able to keep on top of it to day by keeping my head down and bothering no one I have had some funny looks from t
ime to time but I just said sod them we are going to be finished a reasonable time to night if possible and yes we do about 18-15 not bad for a week day.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Well to day I am having of for time owed to me also I have an appointment at Infirmary this after noon.  So I will spend a bit of time in garden putting thing where I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 them.  I am now of to have a farm sale for an hour or so the farm belonged to some old friends of the family they got F&M and decided to sell up the farm was sold about a
 month ago now it is the machinery sail today.  This farm will have been farmed by the same family for possibly one hundred years it is }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 sad to see what F&M has done to some farming people.  Well that\rquote s my quick look in at sale now I am of to Infirmary I go in quite relaxed and couldn\rquote 
t care less a different story when I have had my tests my heart is not what it should be I have got Angina told I have not to drive H.G.V. again until I have had more tests in about three months time all right it is not 
often I take a H.G.V. out but if we run short of drivers I take a vehicle out or if there is new vehicle or trailers to go for I quite often do it to get out of office and see how other half of the world lives so it is quite a blow to me I feel as if I am
 just a spare part it makes one wonder if all the stress that F&M has caused one way and another has anything to do with it.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Of in to work guess what area manager rings up to say there is a new trailer to collect from Burnley will I go for it I
 have to give him the bad news a nice start to the day so arrangements are made for someone else to go for it.  I tire to get my head down and forget my self but it is not easy but no doubt I will get over it load changes to do is it night yet no not yet 
b
ut I can not wait for finishing time.  When I get home I have a planning meeting for a property that needing planning permission from Parish Council unfortunately I am not allowed to get too involved as it concerns my Daughter and Son in Law but thankfull
y rest of Council member vote in favour so no we just have to wait for Eden District council to make a decision.
\par 
\par Thursday.  On my own again until four of the most senior managers of Company arrives for a meeting I finally retire into outer office rather th
an get involved and just get on with my own work.  Yes I knew it would come they call me in to join them oh hell that\rquote 
s all I need in I go but I got a phone call from office that controls reload side so I get let of the hook hooray but no would you take di
gital camera and take photos of yard making sure I have a yard fully used by reload vehicles and how they are set up to utilise room that is set aside obviously I take photos give them disc out of camera then escape have they realised no not yet any way s
o
 that allows me to catch up on some more paper work.  Then they shout for me to join them again no escape this time so we get down to some details involving on going tribunal as if I have not enough on my mind as it is.  Never mind we get it all sorted th
ey }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 decide they have got what they need it is now 17-00 hr and I have to start playing catch up again.  I finally get all done by 19-00 hrs phew it has been a long day and it is not over yet.  The family and I are going on holiday to morrow Friday
 so the lawn is to cut after I get home aren\rquote t I glutton for punishment never mind all gets done have a bath and go to bed it rain all night.
\par 
\par Friday.  Yes it is pack the car water plants in Green houses put all right for a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  who is going to look afte
r them for me while we are away.  The wife is a bit on edge is this done is that done but she is quite good }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 got all cases packed and well organised more than I am.  Were off and it is pouring down what a nice start but it fairs up by we reach Scotch
 corner gets out not too bad bit windy but quite warm in car I even have to put air conditioning on to cool us of a bit.  We make a short break on way down to stretch our legs get a bite to eat then load the grandchildren into their car with their parents
 wife and get into our car and of we set again finally we arrive kids are quite excited cant wait to get into our chalet and let us get unpacked they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to do everything all at once bless them.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Yes it is utter bedlam until we all get breakfast and get out the children }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to go here there and everywhere I hope they calm down as week goes on.  I leave them all to their own devices and escape into Skegness in afternoon for a short while for a look round but I do not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  enjoy it not the best of fettles.  When I get back they are preparing an evening meal which I quite enjoy.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Put a hell of a night in finally I get up have no breakfast just a cup of tea and decide to take myself of to the nearest hospital which was Skegness which is no
t too bad as it is not too far to travel.  I got in and Doctor says he will have me sorted directly and yes he did it was a bit painful but after about two and a half hrs they allowed me to get up get dressed and go back to family I feel a different man n
o
w so I might get down to enjoying myself with the Grandchildren.  I even go swimming in afternoon with them then on to the fairground rides with them good job it is all free or it would cost a fortune go to some of the earlier entertainment then of to bed
 fairly soon.  I am tired out.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid7292541 \page }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 18
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Had a good nights sleep feel heaps better decide to have a walk round the boundary of the complex it takes me three quarters of an hour at a good brisk pace but it will do me good.  Then it\rquote s of to fairgro
und with children good job it is all free.  Had quite a hectic day swimming and one thing and another pity the weather is not so good.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Much of the same again to day have my good brisk walk then help to entertain children.  But isn\rquote t it nice to be away from work no moaning drivers no phone ringing no worries it is just great.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Left for my walk yes it is Wednesday half the week over oh hell never mind it is nice to be away from it all just doing what I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  and seeing the Grandchildren 
enjoying themselves otherwise it is much of the same again to day.
\par 
\par Thursday.  The children are realising its of home again to morrow so they mean to make the most of to day off I go on my daily walk then it is help to entertain the children again they are
 starting to show signs of tiredness after such a hectic week but they still }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to put as much as they can in to there last day of holidays bless them.
\par 
\par Friday.  Up we get breakfast pack our cases pack the ca
r then take them around everything for the last time leave camp at about 12.00 after a quick snack and off we jolly well go home and back to reality we stop for a short toilet break on way back otherwise we have a pleasant journey back.  The wife and I no
ticed what a difference from last year F&M signs every where hardly any live stock in fields but this year no signs plenty of live stock in fields quite a pleasant change }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
.  When we get home lawn is to cut which is quite a task on its own as I have a fair sized lawn before I start to check round Green houses.  All seems to be in order.  Get things sorted then have a good walk round the village then it\rquote s of to bed.

\par 
\par Saturday.  Flower beds to sort bedding plants to put out hanging baskets to sort I spend whole day planting out my flower beds then decide to go into town and do my sons flower beds for him get them done and guess what car will not start }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I have it tow into work where it safe for night go home with the help of my sister who lives in the town have a bath go to bed its been a long hard day.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Back to work oh hell but never mind it could be worse get down to some office work then my mate announces he is going to a Christening but he will be back oh well things don\rquote t alter.  I ri
ng my Garage tell them about car they come and tow me in it is a good job it is handy to our depot.  They give me another car until they get mine repaired but never mind it is still under makers warranty which is a good job because I think it may be a cos
tly job if I was having to pay for it another day done a few last minuet load changes and of home.  It starts to pour down one would almost say whole water coming down it is bad visibility not good driving at all.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 19
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Yes Hols over back to t
he grind oh no it started already load changes the other chap in office has done are not quite working out I will have to revamp them but no panicky they will get done before day is out.  I am on my own no one to help me for rest of week but I suppose if 
anything goes wrong nobody but myself to blame.  The day has been pretty quiet }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 not a lot going wrong no destination changes on reload side oops I spoke to soon a driver has gone sick how do I cover him get that sorted head office rings asking a favour }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing a load of milk moved from one dairy to another some one has made a cock up isn\rquote 
t it nice when senior management admits they have got it wrong now I will have to find another driver it will need a working rest day which management frown upon but it is their fault so what the hell.  All sorted off home.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Start of another trying day get a phone call from driver who I had got to work for me that he had gone sick that\rquote s two sick drivers I have got now.  I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get it sorted and all back to normal.  Then a vehicle breaks down nothing serious soon repaired I contact the first man who }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 sick see how he feels he tells me he will not be in to morrow oh hell I will now have to find another driver who is prepared to work a rest day yes I suc
ceed at last all is going well until night figures will not add up but I soon get that sorted but it is problems that need not happen if every one would take care.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Not a bad start everyone seems to be going normal.  Head office wrings to say t
heir is another farm coming back shortly after F&M yes they are still returning you would think they would all be back by now but it seems some of them are taking their time before they commit themselves and others are doing a major revamp on their facili
ties Milking parlours and housing before they come back it would appear there is grants available but some seem reluctant to take advantage of it may be there is too much red tape involved.  I have contacted first man that }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  sick he says he is still no good for work even though he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s to come in he knows he will not cope but fortunately I can cover everything not a lot of problems to day it gives me a little time to reflect how thing have gone over this last year and what it was like this time last year
 F&M causing problems for everyone and getting everyone stressed up.  The stress is still there caused through problems that have come about by having to readjust everything to accommodate farms coming back and also not relaxing too much just in case F&M 
comes back but I don\rquote t think it will now we seen to have got past the dangerous time now I hope.
\par 
\par Thursday.  The start of another bright and cheerful day I don\rquote t think but we will see how it goes morning not too bad I now contact my sick men first one says he will not be in still groggy although the man who }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  sick second says he will be in that is a relief because I am short of men as it is I will have to work a man a rest day to cover all duties but one of the drivers says he will that\rquote s good.  Then a dr
iver wrings in to say he is delayed picking milk up caused through problems in Appleby area with the Annual Gipsy fair going on.  At least we had no problem with them last year because of F&M it was cancelled for the first time ever.  I now have to do a d
estination change for farm collection vehicle because of the other one being delayed but that does not cause too much of a problem I ring other driver tell him what I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 and he says he will do it no problem isn\rquote t it nice when people can work together inst
ead of being awkward which some of them can be on occasions but I suppose we all have our off days the only difference when you are in charge of them you have not to let it show which can be very stressful at times more so during these changes brought abo
ut by F&M.  I am now righting a note to tell other office bloke what is and has been going on as I am off until Tuesday.  }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid12528393 Hooray}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .
\par 
\par Friday.  Nice fine morning lawn }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s cutting garden hedge needs trimming so here goes before it rains yes you must think I do
 nothing but garden in my days of but I find it is one of the best ways to relieve all the tension for some reason.  I feel quite relaxed after I have done a stint in my Greenhouses and garden.  I even find time to get a trailer load of rubbish to tip how
 
things change in a year disinfected dips and farmers on way into tip nothing this year when one thinks back to last year how I would get phone calls through night from a farmer to say he had gone down with F&M instead of being cross because you had been w
oken up through the night you felt quite pleased with yourself because }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it would have waited tail morning but they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ed someone to talk to and it maid you feel important and also pleased you were of some help to them by consoling them and saying how sorry you were.  I even had ministry vets ringing me at midnight and talking for about an hour discussing problems I }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  don\rquote t think there was anyone connected with farming that was not stressed up in some way or another.  I sometimes wondered how we c
oped.  I still think there will be a lot of stress related illness before we are through I think my own health problems have not been helped by F&M who knows.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Take some rubbish to tip deliver some bedding plants to my sons Girlfriend then have a quick look round local Saturday Market don\rquote 
t see any bargains then it starts raining or should I say absolutely pissing down.  So I make my way home and have some dinner.  The daughter and Grandchildren turn up the children seem a bit crotchety but they 
will get over it I hope.  Maybe a bit tired.  The wife and I decide to go out for a meal at night first pale we go to is full so we try another local hostelries and yes we get in there and have an enjoyable meal.  Then visit some }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s on way home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Get up a cold wet morning have some breakfast check Greenhouses do one or two odd jobs then of to Church then visit another }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  after Church service is over }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 
eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  we get back home have a bite to eat then I sit down for a nice relaxing afternoo
n watching T.V. if I am lucky.  The Daughter Son in law and Grandchildren turn up we all have Sunday meal to gather when ever possible it is nice to see them come and not being awful but is nice to see them go of home as well.  After they have all gone I 
go for a good brisk walk.  Have a bath then off to bed.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 20
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Not too bad a morning my mate calls in asks if I am going for a ride with him he is going to Penarth for some bits and pieces but it takes longer than it should there been a serious
 accident on Motor way all traffic is having to come through Penarth there is another accident in Penarth someone killed in this one then we hear there is another one on the outskirts of Penrith I am not surprised }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  all the extra traffic that is having come through Penrith.  I go down to my mates after dinner he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s a hand to do some fencing we get a start then it starts raining but we get it done then I put a wall gap up for him the day is done by the time I get back home never mind back to work tomorrow.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  What joys have we to day we will se as the day unrolls?  My office colleague turns in about an hour after me says I am pleased to see you back I have some late finishes time you have been off I say nothing but I think how the hell do you 
think I coped when he insisted in taking time off that he claimed was owed him when the F&M was at its worst least said the better anything for a quiet life.  He says he has had t adjust loads more farms coming back after F&M.  He had also run short of tr
a
ilers for reload milk again I think now you know what it is like to be left without trailers which seems to have happened to a few times at weekends caused through his letting other depots having trailers when we were already tight on trailers now he migh
t think before he does it again.  We get through the day not too late a finish.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Take Portable T.V in with me this morning have a good early start through as much paper work as I can then tune T.V. in to watch Foot-ball can\rquote t }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 settle to watch it as there is still things to do but at least one can keep snatching a quick look at game yes we get through to next round but I feel a bit lucky maybe.  Now it is down to some work.  Loads to change a few farmer who have come back after
 F&M Putting bigger tanks in they are all producing more than they were before F&M. once they get their bigger tank in they }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to go onto alternate day collection so the loads are to alter to accommodate them all this is caused by F&M. yes we get it done 
but it does not held you when you are treeing to stay relaxed and not get stressed up.  My Colleague says he is feeling as if he is going to have a hart attack at times he feels it is all the stress he had to go through since F&M. and the extra pressure i
t
 has put on us.  My replied is yes I know just how you feel.  Then I think hang on mate you were having time off when it was at its worst you mist quite a lot of it last year but I say nothing we have a good early finish tonight but I get tormented with p
hone calls on way home and when I get home it makes me think so much for an early finish never mind at least I am at home.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Start of another wonderful day first all I sort problems out from some of last nights phone calls then settle down to the 
days chores loads to change that should be fairly easy but it turns into a mammoth task my colleague thinks we should change them all not just one or two I think it is a bit silly but I am on my self this week end so I had better go along with him because
 if we don\rquote t and it goes tits up it will be my fault.  He says he cant wait for his days off as he feels }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  stressed out I think the F&M has }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  caught up with him as he is complaining he is tired out and on edge all the time yes it will get us all eventually we finally get done by seven a clock at night.
\par 
\par Friday.  Drivers complaining about their load changes one says he can not get in this farm with bigger vehicles another says he will have difficulty at his farms it just goes on my replied is give i
t a go and see what happens and yet first driver to complain comes back in I ask him how he has come on he gives a grin and says no problem I say nothing but he knows why I asked him.  I then wait until about three a clock and ring one of the other driver
s and ask how he has come on he says not so bad says he thinks load is easier to pick up and is on his way to Lockerbie to tip and there is no problems with the other loads either but it wont stop some of them finding fault isn\rquote 
t life a struggle.  Now I get
 a phone call from another farmer who informs me he will be starting back shortly it is now not such a problem when another farm starts back as milk production seems to be easing back a little which gives more room on a vehicle for load changes well that
\rquote s another day over gone better than I expected.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Yes you have guessed it portable T.V. loaded into car of to work fairly early as I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 all done up and dusted as far as I can go before the match starts.  Just on my own no one to contradict me I 
get on quite well most of mornings work done before match starts.  Now I settle down to watch match I think everyone else must being doing same as I hardly get a phone call no one hassles me but they seem to make up for it once game is over never mind it 
w
as nice while it lasted.  It all helps to lift ones spirits for a change not thinking about F&M and all the problems it has left behind it.  Today seems to have been quite a short day but for some reason I feel shattered but I have a reasonable finish go 
home and have some supper have a bath and have an early night in bed soon after eight thirty.
\par 
\par Sunday.  I just knew it could not last drivers riming in milk to warm to collect so I tell them to give it a little time to get temperature down a little bit some
 of them use their brains and wait but others I think are a bit impatient and think if they ring in I will say pick it up but I will not allow this to happen or we would soon be in trouble.  Now a farmer rings up suspect antibiotics in farm vat so there i
s
 a test to be done before we can pick it up it fails so farmer has to dump it he might be a bit more careful in future.  Bloody hell another farmer rings in he thinks he has let milk into vat from a cow that has been treated with penicillin can we test hi
s milk thankfully his milk passed test so we are not too match down on day.  I just wish they would be more careful.  Never mind night is nearly here oh hell now figures will not add up on day\rquote 
s collections and reloads so that is holding me up from getting finished.  What a day if it isn\rquote t one thing it is another never mind it is all in a days work.  But it can get one stressed out.  As if we hadn\rquote 
t had enough stress ah well home have something to eat then go for a walk before in retires to bed.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 21
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par M
onday.  The start of another wonderful week Ha.  Doom and gloom turns in about eight fifteen an hour and a quarter behind me but never mind.  I did not expect him in until Tuesday.  I have a bit of a job to get him settled down to do something he is still
 complaining he is tired and stressed out is he sickening for something I wonder to my self but he eventually buckles down and gets on with things he then asks how load changes }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 over week end.  I say not too bad other than one or two little problems whi
ch I got sorted out the day goes not too bad on the whole other than one driver rings in to say he is full and will have to leave about two hundred litres at his last farm but farmer is not worried he says he will just milk as normal as there is enough ro
o
m in his vat just when we think we are going to have an early night one of the private contractors who hauls our reload tanks backs into another tank and knocks ladder of it so we have to get local engineer out to weld ladder back on.  But yard man kindly
 says he will stay back with him until he gets it repaired so of home I go before anything else can happen.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Not a bad morning looks as if we are going to have decent day weather wise it will please the farmers they will be able to get on making s
ilage what a change from last year they were all running about with grass toppers to keep the grass down the fertilizer merchants must have had a lean time last year as there was not a lot of fertilizer needed due to F&M. as I have said many times during 
this diary when farming is down it has a serious effect on the country\rquote 
s economy it is a great shame the farming world is often laughed and scoffed at because I am still convinced it is the backbone of our little island.  I still feel there will be lots of 
problems and illness to come yet which will have been caused by F&M it will take more than a year or two to put this right.  Not too bad a day at work today milk still dropping but I feel it will pick up again lots of uncertainty at work there is a lot of
 
restructuring going on with one thing and another I feel senior management may be taking stock of things now that F&M is over (we hope) and they may be starting to get shot of dead wood I think there may Depots to close this does not help one after all th
e stress we have gone through with F&M. then these things start to happen even though I don\rquote 
t think our Depot will be affected you never know but wee will soldier on and wait and see.  Oh dear it is a worry not too bad a finish to night go home have a meal then do the Greenhouses then go for a ride on bicycle.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  What a fine start have a driver rings me from Liverpool he is sitting at dairy they will not tip him he is supposed to have antibiotics in his milk I hope not or that is 29000 litres of mi
lk to dispose of I tell him to sit there I will ring Zenith milk head office and inform them they tell me to ring driver back and ask dairy to do another test then ring them with result.  They also ask me to check BC55 to see which farms have gone on load
 for once I am one move ahead of them and tell them I have already done this and at this moment of time I am feeding it into FAX machine to them finally about ten o\rquote 
clock we get phone call to say that milk has definitely failed all tests and they have found another dairy who will take milk at a salvage price in the meantime they ask us to sample all the farms that }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  onto load before we pick them up to day but again I am in front of them and have even found the farm that had antibiotics in his milk and the
 sample taken at his farm to day has failed the farms says he even knows which two cows milk that has caused problem.  I think it is a bit silly one wonders why he put it in his farm vat in the first place he does not seem bothered that the will have to p
a
y for a whole load of milk less salvage price.  He is going out of milk shortly he has sold his herd to a farmer who is coming back after F&M he said he has had enough and could not go through all the problems F&M. have caused again.  My office colleague 
d
oes not seem to have had his heart or mind on the job today can not settle to anything for long to put the icing on the cake he disappears of out to change a vehicle over with another load depot so I am left on my own again never mind I will make sure all
 paper work is done before we go home yes he turns up and asks am I finished my replied is no and we are not going home until all is done but it does not take too long then he asks do I mind if has tomorrow off my answer is no problem if you }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  it take it am I too soft or what I just feel I am past arguing what with all the problems we have during and after F&M it is not worth the hassle.
\par 
\par Thursday.  What a nice bright morning sun is shining looks like being a great day weather wise not too bad a day a day
 in office all has gone well one or two load changes nothing exiting reasonable finish then I hear on radio there is a suspect F&M outbreak on a pig farm in the Midlands that\rquote s all we need I really hope it proves negative I don\rquote 
t think I can take all the extra stress again because believe me there will be it will be worse than last year there will be more restriction than ever if is proved positive but lets hope it is not we will just have to cross our fingers and hope.
\par 
\par Friday.  The wife tells me she has heard on radio that first tests have proved negative for the pig with suspect F&M. it would seem the animal is from a farm in Yorkshire so let\rquote 
s hope rest of tests prove negative I am not looking forward to going through all the stress and problems it cause
d last year.  Lets hope enough was been learned and no-one has to face such a disaster to the farming industry and those connected with again.  It would seem that the amounts of compensation that was paid to farmers was no where near the money that has be
en paid out on the clean up side and slaughter costs that\rquote 
s enough for now on F&M.  There is a football match about to start can England do it again I have my doubts but who knows.  No they could not.  My friend rings me up in a bit of a state he has taken 
his wife to Newcastle for a small operation but they have never been parted before and I think he thinks the whole world is against him I think he is more worried than when F&M was raging the wife tells him to come up and she makes him some lunch along wi
t
h me and we get him calmed down again.  No by night he is as high as a kite again I pop down to see him we sit and talk putting the world to rights discuss the past year and problem F&M has caused and gradually he seems to settle down after a whisky or tw
o or three well I don\rquote t know we lost count.  But never mind if it calms him down.
\par 
\par Saturday.  My }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  is up to see us first thing in morning saying how sorry he was burdening with his problems last night but he said he felt much more pleased to day she wa
s a lot better and he hoped to go and collect her from hospital on Sunday.  The wife and I had a ride into Penrith did a little shopping called to our son then came home.  Daughter son in law and grandchildren arrive in afternoon we get the good news that
 the plans they have put forward for building them a house has been passed.  So now we will have to get down to sorting and completing the sale of the land from a local farmer who is a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 of ours so it should not be too bad.  And let\rquote s hope we can get completion fairly quickly then we can get on and start building.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Two of the grandchildren stayed with us last night so needless to say it is up with sparrows this morning \endash  well the wife is.  Not too bad a day weather wise but needs to be better for the time of year.  Then maybe the farmers who }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to make a bit of hay can get on with it quite a lot seem to have got their first cut of silage in by now a bit different from last year when the ones who were making silage had to make it into big bale 
silage because they could not run on the roads with trailer loads of silage to put in silage champs because of F&M the countless problem it must have caused to some of the Farmers.  Then there were others who had got F&M and all they could do was run roun
d
 their field with toppers to keep grass down and stop it wasting the pastures for another year.  I do honestly think the ordinary public do not know what the farming community have and still are going through lets hope something has been learned from this
 and how the controls of livestock can be better monitored without tying the farmers down too much.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 22
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Not too bad a morning did a bit of weeding in front garden have a bit clean up in vegetable garden weeding etc just a general clean up.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to help my friend do a bit of fencing in afternoon it should have been done last year but with F&M. and one thing and another it never got done.  What was going to be a small job as usual turned into a big job but at least we know we have done a prope
r job instead of make do and mend.  When we had finished I had a ride into Penrith to see an ex work colleague who has retired and has not been too well he was a very good }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 during our work time together had lots of laughs together and I often pop in 
to see him from time to time it seems to perk him up a bit and he likes to catch up on the gossip from work and find out how things are going well not too much to report today but oh dear I am back to work tomorrow what joys will be waiting for me.  I dre
a
d to think I fear I will be a long time in being able to go back into work in a happy frame of mind after all the problems caused by F&M.  I suppose we should be pleased we have jobs to go to but F&M has made it hard and one seems to get stressed a lot ea
sier than used to be the case before F.M.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work problems almost as soon as I go in three Reload trailers standing part loaded bits and pieces from three or four farm collection vehicles where with a little bit of through there need have be
en one only I can see it will cause problems for most of day then I find there is a trailer standing in yard that is required for that my replied is we are short of trailers for reload you can have it if you replace it with another empty one the answer ba
ck is no it will leave them short so I contact management higher up ladder not a lot of joy but I eventually win when some one comes to there senses and realise I am }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 short of trailers.  My colleague is not too wo
rried because he is going on holiday tomorrow wrong attitude I think never mind we just seem to be falling from one problem to another today why did I come back into work.  But finally when I think all is sorted a driver backs in C.O.P. bay to wash reload
 trailer and damages tank lid so I have to take to local engineer to be repaired to make matters worse it is stainless steel but I get it repaired now to see if days figures will add up no they don\rquote 
t I knew there would be problems with so many trailers stan
ding part loaded and stand over milk from yesterday I eventually get figures to tally thank fully but it all helps to get one uptight and stressed up as if had not had enough with F&M.  I feel as if it has all put years on me and am still sure it was most
ly the cause of my health problems that I am now having.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Let\rquote s have a fresh start another day another dollar if only.  The world cup is nearly over but all the ladies will be pleased it is Wimbledon fortnight so they will be glued to their TV\rquote s
 on well what ever turns you on.  Thing not too bad at work to day until night yes you have guessed it figures will not add up again but did not take too much sorting to night I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get home late again of course I am sitting getting my supper and I get a phone call a ladies in village }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s me to have a look at War Memorial in Village it is badly in need of some one to look after it getting a bit neglected.  Of I go for a walk and call in to see her and discuss what to do she says she is prepar
ed to look after it if I can get some one to help tidy it up first.  I thank her very much and agree I will call in and see another chap in village who may give us a help and yes he says he will it is almost ten thirty by time I arrive back home so it is 
have a bath and go to bed.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Back to the grind stone no rest for the wicked what have we for to day another load of milk with antibiotics in bloody hell does these farmer not care fortunately it is detected before it gets in to a reload trailer bu
t arrangements have to be made for someone to take it as salvage milk but we find some one to take it.  The rest of the day does not go to badly one or two minor hiccups but nothing that can not be handled night comes figures add up after second go with o
ne or two adjustments so can I go home yes.  Hooray.
\par 
\par Friday.  Here goes another fine start to the day more milk with antibiotics in it bloody careless farmers as if we had not enough problems with out creating unnecessary ones.  I have to switch a driver r
ound on reload vehicle to get it moved to salvage dairy but it gets done now to catch up on some more paperwork.  One of farm collection drivers come in and says there is no milk at one of his farms he has ceased producing milk fed up after all the proble
m
s of F&M says he could not go through all that again we knew he was finishing but were not sure when you would have thought he would have rung and told us we need not go any more.  He has sold his dairy herd to a farmer who got F&M and was looking for a d
airy herd to get started again unfortunately this farmer is not contracted to sell his milk to our Company so we have lost this milk altogether never mind you win some you lose some.  I hope figures are correct to night as I am meeting a few }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s and going for a meal so I don\rquote t }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to be late home yes they add up but I am still not finished as soon as I would have liked to have been.
\par 
\par Saturday.  What joys have we for today?  I go in to find one of the outside haulers we use on reload side has taken
 wrong trailer luckily the trailer that he should have taken is going to same dairy so one of our drivers has to take it instead.  Another haulier has not turned up to take a load to a dairy at Liverpool he has been held up at a dairy with his first load 
s
o is running a bit late oh dear is it going to be one of those days I hope not things getting a bit hectic in yard.  Yard man is getting a bit uptight farm collection vehicles are coming in too fast no trailer to load into I divert phone to mobile and go 
down and help him and I wash a few trailers out for him and he calms down again things go not too bad for rest of day then Head office ring up say the }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 an extra reload to go to a dairy in South end in morning I tell them I have no spare drivers but I ch
eck with another two depots see if they can help me out one of them comes up with a driver they say they will send him over with their van in morning so I tell them there will be a vehicle and a load available about 10-30 in morning that is okay I think t
h
ey think we can work wonders expecting us to come up with manpower at such short notice is not especially at 05-30 on a Saturday night.  All these problems help to make it a late finish again I am sure these problems were not here before F&M everything us
ed to seem to run so smoothly before or is it because of all the stress and problems it caused we are all on shorter fuse and have not as much patience.
\par 
\par Sunday.  What a horrible day reload tanker held up at a Dairy over the North East not just an hour or t
wo but five and six hours which has a knock on affect because they are not back in time for farm collection vehicles to off load into so they have to wait which makes them late in their afternoon collections and farmers are not too pleased.  I eventually 
g
et them away again only to in the same position again when they come back in with next loads.  I plead with higher management to get me some reload tanks some how and also get something sorted at this particularly dairy that is causing problems with all t
h
e hold ups.  Yes they come to my rescue with two extra trailers which does help but problem with dairy is another matter for someone else to sort.  Just when I get things sorted at about 18-30h they come on with load changes for to morrows deliveries when
 
all is set up to run for next day fortunately it is an afternoon load so it does not cause too much of a problem.  But is should not happen this late in the day what with drivers getting held up and getting close to their legal driving time and keeping ev
e
ryone happy it is no easy task then to top it all I have some more farms coming back after F.M. next week it is enough to drive a man insane when will things ever get back to normal.  I can not take much more of this.  I am sure the pressures of F&M. are 
telling their tale on me now never mind I will try and put a brave face on I have got all sorted for day 19-30 hr can I go home \endash 
 dare I go home.  Sunday roast could be either burned or all dried up by now.  No it is not too bad sit down and really enjoy my meal then I go for a brisk walk round the village have a bath and go to bed and wait for another day to dawn \endash 
 perish the thought.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 23
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Yes it is Monday.  I have not been at work long and one of the so called top men turns up unannounced and quite casually asks how are things going?  I replied not too bad why have we got a problem he replies don\rquote 
t worry old pal your alright and I think what the hell\rquote s going on, I can sense it, he asks me where our floating fitter is when I tell him his repli
ed is he should not be there and I tell him particular dept that he is at phoned on Friday asking for his services on Monday as far as I was concerned there was no problem but he does not seem too pleased \endash 
 the subject was changed but I knew there was a problem because every time his mobile phone went he disappeared \endash  he obviously did not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 me to cotton on to anything but me being me, quite candidly said to him \'93which depot is the hatchet team visiting to day is it the one where fitter is?\'94  He just gives a wry smile and says don\rquote 
t worry old pal.  My reply is I think I already know but obviously you can not tell me.  As the day unfolds I glean bits of information one boss disappears another turns up he is a bit more forth coming with me he also says
 do not worry you are alright.  Yes it has happened, we got an announcement that a Depot has been given notice of closure in September along with lots of other changes and redundancies I can not but feel F&M along with other things in the milk industry an
d the farming world has been the main cause of the closure never mind day is over I go home a little sad to night wondering when and where it will all end.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Start of another day got to remember to quote our new name when ever I answer the phone \'93Dairy Farmers of Britain how can I help you\'94 \endash  is a bit of a mouthful after you have been saying \'93Zenith milk how can I help you\'94
 but surprise it seems to come out quite easily.  There seem to be a bit of unrest among the drivers today which is understandable but what I can say other than says at least we still have our jobs but this doesn\rquote 
t seem to calm them down.  Other than this, the day goes reasonably well thankfully nearly time to go home but not yet, day figures do not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to add up correctly b
ut it does not take too much sorting and off I go home.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Problems right off driver phones to say he is having problems getting his tank emptied at a dairy over North East, yes the same one as gave me problems on Sunday sure enough I get one or 
two more call from more drivers before morning is over thank fully I have got plenty of reload tanks standing empty to day so the farm collection vehicles will not be held up another farm starting back after F&M.  There still a few more to come back yet u
n
less they decide not to come back.  Now we hear of another blow to farmers and Milk industry Nestle at Dalston announce they are giving about seventy farmers they may be cancelling their contracts to pick up their milk which again is a direct result of F&
M
. as they lost quite a lot of export order for their products and foreign countries found other sources of supplier it is really sad now I just need some load destination changes to dairies at last minute and yes I get them but it is not too bad quite eas
y really paper work sorted and of home.
\par 
\par Thursday.  What problems do we have to day get things sorted then I find out I have an unhappy yard man.  I go out and have a word with him to see if there is anything I can do but of a short talk with him I realise 
it is something I can not sort out my self needs someone higher up than me he is not a happy man.  Never mind I get on with my work.  Senior manager turns up asked me if I have learned anything from yard man I tell him to tread careful or we will not have
 
a yard man and he will be a big loss to Depot.  Manager goes out of his way to talk to more senior people in firm asking for advice but I think he may be wasting his time.  Eventually goes out to yard man and has a talk to him he comes back in and tell me
 
he thinks he has sorted problem but I still have my doubts because the responsibility yard man has and the working conditions out in yard transhipping milk is no fun.  I also feel he is not paid enough for what he does but no-one listens to me when it com
e
s to money.  Otherwise not too bad a day.  I even escape for an hour or so while I leave Area manager holding the fort.  When I go back in he says will you be alright I am going home my replied is no problem I have managed on my own this past ten days he 
j
ust smiles and says I know how you feel.  All paper work adds up to night not to bad a finish I get home and have my supper the I get a phone call from my friend asking me to help him move some sheep which we do then it fill in diary have a cup after a ba
th and off to bed.
\par 
\par Friday.  Start of another trying day a farm collection vehicle comes in to offload his milk as he has a problem with his running gear on his trailer it looks bad at first but after a proper inspection it can be repaired fairly easy also 
I find new padlock that was put on gate last night has been broken a driver could not get in through night so rather than ring me he broke it off \endash 
 bloody Mickey Mouse locks.  The morning seems to go fast quite busy I just get reload side of things sorted 
out and head office start to change things it would seem there is still too much milk about who would have believed it this time last year you would almost say F&M has made some of the farmers more determined to produce more food than is }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  needed.  I also hear a vaccination programme will be brought in if F&M starts again subject to Farmers and everyone else concerned but let\rquote 
s hope it never does.  The Agriculture show is with us again sadly we did not have one last year.  I feel it will be causing som
e headaches for show organisers with all the red tape and rules that have to be strictly stuck to it will be a new learning curve for lots of shows if they are to continue never mind they day gets over with not too many more mishaps I finally get to go ho
me at 19-00 hrs been a long day but it does not feel that way I cut lawn after supper then go for a walk.  Have a bath then retire to bed.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Things go quite well to day other than more farms inform me that they are coming back after F&M.  Others that inform me they will be increasing their herd size obviously that means more load changes on farm collection side it is a headache }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  but it is to do if we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 things to run reasonably smoothly but I sometimes wonder if that will ever happen again F&M has just caused one disruption after another and how long will it go on for a long time I fear.  Well it is time to go home I ring my o
ffice colleague to brief him what has been going on time he has been on holiday tell him what I have done and not done with load change and tell him if he has any problem to give me a ring as I will not be back in until either Tuesday or Wednesday.
\par 
\par Sunday
.  Decide to go for a day out for a change so the wife and I have a early snack for lunch and of we go heading into Scotland we have a nice quiet ride through Gretna head for Dumfries call in a garden centre on way and I am thinking to my self all the tim
e isn\rquote t it nice to see the fields full of livestock again.  We eventually arrive at Dumfries have a bit look round in the shopping centre then decide to come back to Gretna and have a look round their not a lot going on }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 
eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  we arrive at a local Hostelries and treat our selves to a bar meal.  Not satisfied with the day yet so we decide to give my brother and his wife a visit on way home }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  we arrive home have a bath and of to bed.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 24
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  I could get used to having a day or two of like this I seem to have done nothing but run about in car again today went to Penrith first then }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to Daughters and took her to local Doctors as she had no car to day her Husband needed it.  Then I went to Carlisle but that was a fruit less journey as I could not find anything that I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ed came back to Daughter went down to school and watched the Grandchildren having a swimming lesson then the wife and I decided it was time to go home had some supper then I washed and polished car then went for a 
walk seems to have been quite a hectic day.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work at one time I thought I might have gone to Yorkshire Show but I decided against it and went to work instead at one stage I thought why have I come back in duties had been altered men not c
overing duties I had set out for them to do before I went home on Saturday night even some of men had been taken of regular vehicles I nearly said something then thought its been done now for what ever reason I do not know and yes as the day unfolds my ma
te does not know why he did it or he just does not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to admit he posed it up.  Went out in afternoon to local Newspaper office to collect some back dated papers as Senior management seems to think it will help us with ongoing unfair dismissal case.
  I just wish it was all over.  We have a fairly reasonable finish get home have some supper then sort Green houses out and call it a day just my evening walk now.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Start of what seems as if it is going to be another trying day no yard man spare driver doing the reload of milk from farm collection vehicles to reload tanks and of course a certain person has to be there and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}
{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  there is no need there are some more important tasks to do like load changes.  I am not feeling too well to day I have
 to go to Aspatria Depot to pick up a fitter when I get back a heap of paper work to sort and I am not feeling too well I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 a sharp finish as I have a Parish Council meeting to night as well.  I eventually get home have a quick meal and a bath then of to meeting it all }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 fairly well even down to welcoming a new Parrish Clerk.  Now let me get home to bed.
\par 
\par Thursday.  I go in to work still not right health wise but I may improve as day goes on.  Guess what no yard man no spare driver my mate says 
he is going to yard himself my replied is and what about load changes we have to do two heads are better than one when load changes are being done his replied is we will do some of them before there is any milk to tranship then I can finish them off but h
e takes master plans out into yard with him so I am working blind but I do some and my health does not improve as day goes on Area manager turns up and between part time office girl and him they finally persuade me to go home and leave them to it I }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  home in bed by 15-00 hrs and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  out like a light got up about 20-00 hrs for a short while and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  back to bed.
\par 
\par Friday.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 Went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  into work felt a bit better but got a surprise when I got in my colleague had done load changes said he had been there until 19-20 hrs at least that\rquote 
s what his note said and on it he also informed me he would not be in I thought oh shit but never mind I am not going to lie down and cry I will just get on with it ill or not.  Then I get a phone call from one of the most senior manager
s what he told me quite pleased me and lifted my spirits immensely so my stress and worry seems to go away as day }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 on.  I got my head down and got on with everything including some load changes I had to make so much for him stopping back so late last night I eventually get all sorted and of home I am knackered!!
\par 
\par Saturday.  What a glorious morning is this start of summer not too bad a day load changes seem to being going alright a quiet day }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 .  I have a call from someone who wants to start farming 
and produce milk would we be interested in their milk I tell them to contact head office then I think after all the F&M and you }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to start farming not for me I think but every one to their own.  The heat in office is uncomfortable I feel like taking all things out side this is the weather we need.  Night is hear again paper work done off home and have another early night to bed.

\par 
\par Sunday.  Start of another day nothing exciting to day.  I feel a whole lot better to day not as stressed out have a bit more f
eel for what I am doing to day I was starting to get a bit worried but I feel more relaxed again now another fine day has it come to stay?  Quite a reasonable finish to day off home have my Evening meal water Green houses have walk then a bath and off to 
bed.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 25
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Things are not too bad this morning my office colleague seems quite calm after his week end off but I get the feeling he is on edge about something just what I am not too sure morning progresses quite well then Area manager comes an
d calls him into back office I know it is to give him a fresh contract of employment and wage rise but I am not supposed to know.  As the day progresses things start to come out I also get the feeling he is not too happy with contract but that is nothing 
to do with me.  Otherwise day went well I have kept my head down and got on with any changes that have had to be done checked up on services for vehicles and trailers and kept up with paper work and guess what we get an early finish.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Not such a good day my mate a bit down in dumps it is getting to be worse than F&M his mood changes finally I announce I am going out to assess a driver thinking to my self you can stew in your problems I don\rquote 
t need all this we have quite a successful assessment but guess what a heap of paper work not done when I come back but I soon get it sorted out and guess what another early finish good eh.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Not a bad start my mate seems a bit more positive this morning then he eventually gets on his high horse with hi
s problems then he starts checking on all the extra hours drivers have had recently with dairy hold-ups as far as I am concerned they have done the work fairly so pay up and look happy but he will be thinking they are making more than he is \endash 
 greedy sod.  I sometimes think he is a sad man.  I nearly went out and did another assessment but it is a good job I did not because my mate jumps up and says that\rquote 
s it I have had enough I am going home see you on Friday he will be upset when he has worked out how much
 overtime driver have got poor fellow.  I sometimes think I am better on my own at least there is no one complaining has F&M affected him this much or is it just the nature of the silly man.  I get sorted think I am going get sorted fairly soon but no the
 days figures do not gel together but I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  find the problem and of I go home.  Phew it\rquote s been all go today.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Not been at work ten minuets and phone rings a driver warns me there may be a load of mi
lk rejected at a dairy over the North East but I wait and wait to hear confirmation from dairy nothing happens so I ring dairy thinking some one is on a wind up here but no the dairy is taking its time on making a decision it is like waiting to see if a f
a
rm has been confirmed with F&M do we go in and pull vehicle out or wait and see yes eventually it is rejected now we know which way we are going but it all helps to get one stressed up as if there is not enough day to day problems with things altering dai
ly since F&M restrictions were lifted it is not easy to day just seems to have been one problem after another but as the day unfolds things fall into place and guess what after all the problems of the day ends not too bad at all.
\par 
\par Friday.  Well he made one 
mistake he will not see me Friday because it is my day off.  I am going to do a few jobs at home then give my friend a bit help with a job or two we finish day of by loading his bales of hay which we put into two big heaps in field then put a sheet over t
hem so we were able to keep them dry my friend took me home and we decided we would go to the Cumberland show to morrow.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Yes we go to show the weather does not look too promising but it may not be too bad.  I am afraid the show was not too pleas
ing not up to my expectations I know it is hard to come back after last year but they have either failed to overcome Defra regulations and include livestock in show or they thought regulations were too strict and did not bother but I am afraid I was not i
mpressed with show never mind if you don\rquote t go you don\rquote t find out.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Fairly quiet day doing a lot of nothing my friend calls in to see me to say he will be calling in for me fairly soon for me to go and help him prepare Penrith Show field as it is ne
xt Saturday 27-07-02 and he is Chairman of show committee but we do not do a lot set things in motion for Next day.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 26
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  My friend calls for me as we have a small job to do then off to show field I am told to get lawn mower started and cut o
ut the sections for show stands which takes up a fair part of my day as the day unfolds I think oh hell back to work to morrow what joys will there be there god knows.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work my mate does not seem too cooperative seems to be a bit secretive does not }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 to talk about things then I realise why its happened again we are short of trailers for reload why does he let this happen I do not know but we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 get through the day with a few hold ups all I can do is hope tomorrow is better it is now 19-00 hrs well past time to go home.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  On my own to day my mate says he is owed time off so he is taking it I am not worried I sometimes find it easier on my own.  I am just a bit worried if load changes will work out that was done la
te last night first loads are ok lets hope the rest are alright yes they turn out OK. and guess what I have one more spare reload trailer than I expected so what with load changes and shortage of trailers on Tuesday to end up like this tonight I am quite 
pleased.
\par 
\par Thursday.  On my own again to day things are going not too bad not too many hold ups at dairies so reload vehicles are returning not too bad no problems I can not believe this I can even have a good finish to end the day well.
\par 
\par Friday.  Two of us today but my mate seems in good form today but a farmer rings up to say he has too much milk he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s to go back onto every day collection another farmer who got F&M and has come back producing more milk than ever but I get it sorted the rest of day goes well have an early finish.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Penrith Show day I have taken day off to help with show I have helped for a few years now but this year is quite different what with F&M restrictions the show committee in there wisdom have been very brave and de
cided to have livestock in the show after a great deal of consultation with Defra I think the show committee have got to be congratulated my job for day is to disinfect vehicles as they come in with livestock }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  all get here then we put the barrier
 up to prevent anyone getting near live stock without first going through foot dip.  I then have a walk round show stands have a bit talk with a few friends from farming world.  The show committee have got to be congratulated for putting on such a good sh
o
w after F&M.  I eventually meet up with my son and a friend of his they have been in charge of parking of horse boxes which I can promise you is not an easy task I know as I have helped to park horse boxes in previous years we now go and have lunch have a
 
bit more look round show stands watch one or two displays in main ring then it back to work as the people who had livestock entered are ready to go home so they are to spray out again but at least they are all nearly going out together which is better tha
n this morning when they were coming in dribs and drabs never mind the end of an enjoyable day even if it has been tiring day and I understand the Gate has been good.
\par 
\par Sunday.  My friend came and picked me up to go to show field to help with the task of tid
ying up we were the only ones there for quite a while so we did not feel guilty when we came away and left the others working.  My friend dropped me off and I decided to do a bit of tidying up in our Garden the vegetable plot was starting to look at bit n
eglected it took me longer than I thought then I cut the lawn so I am afraid at least Sunday morning was not a day of rest for me.  Never mind I took it easy in afternoon watched the Germ Grand Prix and ended day by watching Commonwealth Games.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid7292541 \page }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 27
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Back into work what a mess short of trailers farm collection vehicles standing queued up in yard can not get them tipped \endash 
 oh bloody hell how does he do it I plead with senior management to get more trailers in but I am afraid it is falling on dea
f ears this is a bit of an anticlimax after all the arrangements for Penrith Show went so well at weekend.  This is one of the worst days I have had at work for a long while one seems to get stressed up a lot easier these days is it the after effects of F
.M. I wonder my mate in office does not help just keeps moaning and making excuses for the mess we are in then he buries his head in so called load changes but I cant see anything he is doing \endash  Hooray night is here home we go at last.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  The start o
f another splendid day Ha. Ha. what are we going to do still short of trailers load changes to do we will get there yes loads get sorted my mate decides he is going home at 12-00 o-clock at least things might run better now.  Yes things seem to be going b
etter already Area manager turns up and we have a talk about the state of things \endash 
 but things are looking up now manager has gone I am left to my own devices guess what I have won two extra reload trailers but these may be gone by Thursday as I am having Wednesday off.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Day off my friend comes and picks me up he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s a hand with an odd job or two it takes until lunch time.  After I have had a bite to eat I set to work with pressure washer to clean the patio in front of my house I did not get it [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 couple of words unclear \endash 
 bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] for some reason.  I will blame it on pressures of F&M. it is unbelievable how match grime and muck there is coming off after tea the wife and I decide to go and see the Grandchildren then we go on to see m
y brother and his wife we finally get back home and off to bed.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Yes back to work and guess what no spare trailers again but we will plod on.  I confront my office mate with some things I am not too happy with he is rather taken aback at first b
ut denies all knowledge of anything I confront him with.  Nearly lunch time and Area manager turns up we all have our lunch then the area manager says to us both sit your selves down I never mind some things sorted out again my mate is taken aback but I j
u
st sit back and listen because it seems all problems are pointed at my mate but I have to admit what manager is saying is right even though my office mate tries to deny it but at least has given him food for thought I can see he is not too pleased as the 
r
est of the day unfolds all he can say is it time to go home yet eventually at about 17-45 I say go home I will tie the day up he is not twice to tell that will be the last I will see him until Monday so if things go pear shaped I will have no one but myse
lf to blame.
\par 
\par Friday.  I am sitting at the Computer just completing some figures when one of Senior management walks in I think oh hell whets wrong now I immediately jump up and welcome him and ask him if he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s a cup of tea or coffee his reply no you finish what you are doing I will make a one for us both.  We then sit down and have a short talk some of the things he says to me quite pleases me.  Then of he goes [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] in good spirits seems pleased he has boosted my e
go the rest of the day goes fairly well no big problems and yes clever sod I have won back my spare trailers for reload by fair means or foul I am quite pleased with my self.  I am just putting key in office door to lock up and my mobile phone rings load 
changes on reload side but thankfully it is not too bad to sort but it makes me late home.
\par 
\par Saturday.  A nice quiet day not a lot to go wrong one or two minor load changes nothing to exciting I even have time to sit back and think about the past year and wo
nder if things will ever return to normal in the farming world I some how doubt it Penrith Auction company announced its closure last week which I think will be a direct result of F&M.  Plus this stupid government not helping the farming world with their 
silly ideas they have against live sail of animals.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Not too bad a day some minor hold ups with reload side but nothing that I was unable to cope with not a bad day }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  nothing startling to report.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 28
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Not too bad a morning my mate back in asked him how his weekend had gone his reply was not too bad but could have been better I thought Typical never satisfied as the morning }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 on more doom and gloom set in with him but I just ignored him and got on with things nothing }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  going on out of the ordinary night comes and off home day of tomorrow.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Have a general clean up in vegetable plot take some rubbish to tip then go to sons Girl}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s house in afternoon clip a hedge for her then a load of slabs arrive for her as she
 is going to have a piece of her back garden flagged so I help to barrow them round to back of house for when they are ready to lay them then it is off home its been a long afternoon.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Back in to work what joys have we to day not a lot of probl
ems with any one my mate is going to a Health & Safety meeting at Dalton in Yorkshire so at least he is out of my hair not long after he has gone Area engineer pops in for a bit talk and asks how things are going I give him my views on one or two things t
h
at I think he should know he seems to listen to me but will he follow my views through he might.  Doom & Gloom comes back from meeting at about 16-00 hrs I ask him what he has learnt and he just shakes his head as if he thinks it may have not been up his 
street so I don\rquote t ask him any more just get on with paper work and have a quick finish day off again to morrow.
\par 
\par Thursday.  I will have to contact members of Parrish Council to sort out a planning meeting it takes until nearly lunch time.  After lunch I go and help my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to sort some sheep out we could not [}{
\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 a few words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] what with F&M. he had his sheep taken in contiguous cull which was sad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 as I have said in earlier diary comments they were pedigree blue faced leisters.
\par 
\par Friday.  Back to work can make neither head nor tail of some of the paper work and it seems some of the drivers cant either so I say sod it sort out what I can then I get on with computer until my mate comes in then I get things sorted but he does not see
m
 too sure even though he set it all up yesterday good eh.  He then starts his game of changing all the farm collection routes or tries until I ask him what he is going to achieve by doing them as I explain we are not gaining anything by them but he does n
o
t listen then about lunch time he admits defeat and says I think you are right we will leave them as they are.  The day unfolds by night I find we do not have enough milk to fill all the reload trailers but never mind last one will top up in morning all t
he days figures add up so lets go home I say to my mate see you after weekend as he is off again.  I go home and forget mobile phone so I have to go back for it in case anyone wrings with any problems through night.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Things are going not too bad then a driver rings in to say he is full so I have to do a quick load change its a good job my office mate did not get his way with load changes or we would have }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  been in the shit because his load changes would not have worked and I would have had to
 done lots of changes to get things to run right.  Things go alright for rest of day.  When is this milk going to stop rising I just can not understand it the price farmers are getting for it does not justified why they are producing so much it seems some
 of them are trying to catch up on lost time after F&M. when will things settle down and get back to normal.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Yes it is Sunday I am waiting on phone ringing from drivers who are delivering milk to dairy over North East as we will be having our regular Sunday delays and yes how right I am.  I get all morning farm collection emptied into reload vehicle no 
h
old ups but come midday the hold ups starts not enough reload tanks back to offload into but delays to farm collection side not too bad.  Big delays at night finally get every one emptied by 19-00 hrs phew its been a long hard day now I am off home I am f
eeling a bit shattered are things starting to tax me.  I still blame the pressure we have had from the after math of F&M. or am I growing old?
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 29
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  My mate is back in does not seem too bad I report weekends going ones tell him about yesterday
s delay at Blaydon dairy the phone starts ringing drivers are still having problems then this morning fortunately we are not loading quite as much today so not too many problems with hold ups.  We start and try to sort out some more farms we are getting b
ack with Kendal depot closeting at end of September it is not going to be easy we may need to take on drivers if senior management agrees otherwise day goes by not too bad.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Guess what he is of again so I am on my own again never mind I will get by.  I get mornings work sorted computer work done computers and me are not too }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ly but it is to do as morning unfolds I realise there is still a reload tank that has not gone.  I make a couple of phone calls and find there has been load changes but ha
ve not been told it seems I am not the only depot another three like it good eh.  As it turns out it helps me out for next day\rquote s deliveries as I am short of milk any way so some good has come out of someone\rquote 
s blunder.  I sort some load changes out make fresh sheets out for drivers so they know which farms they are picking up otherwise things are O.K. days figures are right so of home I am going before anything goes wrong.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  A bit of an up and down day bits of problems here and there.  Sent a relo
ad vehicle into Carlisle for a service driver comes back and reports it needs fresh clutch in very shortly so I make arrangements for it to go in on Friday as we are short of drivers on Friday for reload work it avoids us having to park it up doing nothin
g
 it looks better if it under repair than standing still things running smoothly just ready to go home and an environment officer and a member of the Eden district council turns up to say Thacker beck is running white they think it is milk and yes we have 
h
ad a spillage but it should not e going down Thacker drains are checked dye put down in our depot then one of them goes to check at other end and yes out it come at other end but one of them is not sure if it is entirely our fault as spillage should have 
gone into sewer drain and not surface water drain.  He thinks there may be a blockage or a broken drain will need cameras down so we leave them with it is now gone seven a clock at night.
\par 
\par Thursday.  The start of another trying day.  I have to stop everyone
 from washing their vehicles out until drains are sorted fortunately I am able to do this without causing too much of a problem.  Eden district Council drain man comes in about 08-00 hr to say they have not found anything with cameras yet they are going t
o
 try a bit further along drains he soon comes back quite excited he has found problem another firm on the estate has put a security fence up round their yard sunk a cement post into ground and broken drains allowing sewerage drain to overflow into surface
 
water drain asks us to hold of using our CIP system for washing vehicles out as long as we can to give them a chance to make a temporary repair I tell him we can hold of until lunch time he says that is fine.  He arrives back around 13-00 hrs to say all i
s now repaired pipe work sorted out and they are filling hole back in and thanks us for being so cooperative }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 we had not choice thank fully no blame has been put on us for contamination of Thacker beck even though we did have a spillage of milk it mak
es one wonder what would have happened if F&M restrictions had still been with us I have a feeling all hell would have been let loose and the area would have been swarming with little Defra men making them selves }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  important and we would have probably having to jump through hoops and do backward somersaults to please them and all sorts of silly restrictions would have been put on us (what a relief phew that\rquote 
s another fine mess we have got out of).  To put the finishing touches to day figures do not add up bloody hell but it is sorted eventually and off home we go.
\par 
\par Friday.  Day off what am I going to do first lets see.  I will go into Penrith one or two things I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  including some paint sheds and garage door needs painting needless to say I have 
been putting of doing this job for too long as I hate painting never mind back home got paint now I will cut lawn no I have had to give over too heavy a dew last night and sun is taking its time to dry it of grass I try again a bit later on still not a lo
t
 better but I get it done then have a bite to eat and a bit rest it is too hot to paint or even work.  I decide to do a little bit in Greenhouses cut excess leaves of tomatoes let a bit of daylight in then tomatoes might ripen a bit quicker but it is to h
ot I have to give over.  Later in afternoon a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 comes to load me some information onto computer and connect me to internet I only hope I can make use of it to its full advantage.  Parish council Planning meeting to night but I can assure you it did not
 go down as well as it should have done.  I sometimes wonder why I let them spade me to stand as Chairman again I must be a glutton for punishment.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Up at 05-45 hr sanding doors down in preparation for painting them I thought I would get on with them be fore the heat of sun got up had quite a good morning got more done than I expected just had an idle afternoon nothing exciting.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Up early of to sons girl}{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s house to help lay flags not a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  exciting job but it will be to do and th
e weather does not look too promising sure enough it starts raining but heavy enough to stop us you would think I should be taking it a bit easier in my state of health and all the stress I have had this last year with F&M and other problems I have had bu
t it all seems to keep me going needless to say I feel quite tired at times some day I might learn to take life a bit easier but no doubt God willing not for a long time yet I sometimes think if you keep busy it helps to take your mind of things.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid7292541 \page }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 30
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  What a nice start today found I have somehow lost \'a315 pounds from my pocket \endash 
 wife not happy either then Ian comes to collect my Diaries we have a cup of coffee and away he goes after a bit talk I go back into house about hour and a half after h
e has gone and guess what he has forgot to pick them up so it seems I am not the only forgetful one \endash  so I phone him and he says post them on to him, so that is O.K. for now \endash 
 is it going to be one of those days.  The rest of the day goes not too bad go and see daughter and Grandchildren come home and finish painting go for my walk at night then sit down and watch T.V. then to round day off I get stung by a wasp.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work when I get in my mate is already there I can not believe it this has ne
ver happened all the time we have worked together for him to be in before me is he not well yes I know we are having a health and safety audit by head safety officer but coming in early will not make any odds.  Audit goes not too bad things going great un
til night and i find we are a load down for reload side for next days deliveries I don\rquote t think he believes me and I know I am right whets more we were O.K. on Thursday night when I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 home so it has crept up over week end and now we are a load deficit he finally admits I am right sort it as for us we can then off home I have my evening meal then cut the lawn and it is night.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Nothing really exciting going on at work today things seem to be going quite smoothly I need an early finish to night my
 mate does not seem to mind even volunteers to take phone call through night instead of me being on call.  So of I go home have a bath and get changed I and pick my }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 up who is going with me to a reunion of all or most of the people who are filling th
e diary for the panel on F&M meal was put on for us.  I think no one was ready to go home at the end of the evening we were all having such a good talk I think we should have at least another of these get together nights before this exercise is wound up p
ossibly two.  Maybe even a knees up.  What does the panel leader think?
\par 
\par Thursday.  What joys am I going into this morning the thought of it puts a dampener on last nights enjoyable get together helped to relieve all the pressure and stress.  Never mind bac
k to the grind stone not too bad a day figures add up then my mate says he will not be back in until Thursday next week I just reply what ever \endash  then I think how much time does he need off but say not a word least said easiest mended.
\par 
\par Friday.  All on my own but then I can not blame anyone if things go wrong can I.  Quiet day \endash  too quiet \endash  I think something is bound to go wrong before day is out but no all ads up at night even get an early finish not a lot to report.

\par 
\par Saturday.  All on m
y own again not even one of the part time girls in office I have everything running smoothly not a lot going on give me time to wander back into the goings on of the last year and think to my self any one who can forget about the disaster that was caused 
b
y F&M must not be normal.  I also think yes the sheep and cattle dealers got a lot of the blame for F&M spreading over such a wide area so quickly but where would the sheep breeders in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland be without these dealers yes the
y have been condemned but the sheep breeders would not be able to continue without them.  It is when things like this pass through your mind you come down to earth again because it makes you realise we all need one another in some way for survival sad isn
\rquote t it.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Another quiet day too quiet I will suffer for it after Monday and the Bank Holliday weekend is over never mind make the best of it while I can time on my hands again once again it sets me thinking about all the problems we had with F&M all t
he precautions and disinfecting of men and vehicles and how much longer it was taking to collect a load milk because of all the restrictions you get worked up just thinking about I am afraid it is very doubtful if I will ever really be able to get it out 
of my mind I think it will haunt me for years.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 31
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Bank Holliday Monday someone has to work but thankfully all seems to be going okay bit short of milk maybe but I tell yard man to load reload trailer accordingly and we should not be to bad 
yes we succeed in getting the correct no of trailer loaded even if one or two is a wee bit down on litre age better that way than a dairy not getting a load all goes well another decent finish this can not last.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Will all hell break loose to toda
y when all staff are back in at head office trying to catch up on weekend work I wonder but no a quiet morning.  The afternoon not too bad either still a bit short of milk for reloads so we will do the same as yesterday not too bad by day is out every thi
ng balances out \endash  off home I go.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Peaceful yet again am I having a charmed life or what better not speak too soon had I.  No it cant last a driver rings in he has broken down but I suggest one or two things to him over phone and he goes and trie
s them then rings back to say all is well again thank god.  I have a little time to my self and start thinking about all the upheaval at Penrith Auction mart and problems it is causing some brave farmers are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ing to buy it out and run it them selv
es I do not think they should I would hate to see them get their fingers burnt on such a risky venture especially after all the hardship farmers have gone through with F&M never mind back down to earth concentrate on [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] night comes all ads up so I am going home when things are quiet.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Doom and Gloom is back in moaning and groaning this is wrong that is wrong our peace has been shattered.  I am beginning to think the man is ill and one of the girls in office agrees with me.  Sad people aren\rquote 
t we.  I find the best way is to keep my head down get on with the job in hand and he seems to settle down but does not seem to get a lot done but he is working quietly away the night comes and he has this to do that to 
do but I just calmly look at him and say it is nearly all done all that is to do find total for day all other figures for day have been done.  I then say do you mind if I go home and leave you to finish of he says he doesn\rquote 
t mind so I am off before he changes his mind.
\par 
\par Friday.  Weekend off what am going to do up at 07-00 Garden hedge to clip will I get it done before it rains I will try half done and it tries to rain but it holds of till am nearly finished then it really rains.  But never mind I have got i
t done and tidied up.  Go into house have a bit practice on computer that tries me but I will master it some day.  I then get washed and changed and go to a friends funeral in afternoon a very nice service if there is such a thing as a nice funeral servic
e but I suppose life has to come to an end for us all sooner or later.  The weather has really taken a turn for the worse by now really quite wet.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Another month gone what am I going to do today one or two jobs at home then of to Penrith Open Market have a good look round buy one or two things meet up with some }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
s I have never seen for a long time I will have to go to market more often.  I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  come home and not a lot more done.  Not a bad day.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Start of another month and what 
a nice day.  Wife goes to Church I should have gone with her but stayed at home and took remainder of potatoes up not a good crop this year but it seems every one else is the same.  Rest of family here for tea then we go and see my Brother at night not a 
bad day again another week gone.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 32
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Another bright and sunny morning this is great I have a general tidy up in garden back and front load all rubbish into trailer then take it to council tip come back home have a bite to eat.  Do a few odd 
jobs in afternoon not a lot of anything really just a lazy afternoon.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work lots of loose ends to tie up no one been in yesterday just what the two off
ice girls have done so you can imagine what I have to sort out as they know nothing about farm collection or reload side of thing but they had done well really.  Not too bad a day but I warn milk movements we are going to be short of milk but it falls on 
d
eaf ears but yes about 16-30pm and I prove myself right but still no one listens to me until they see days totals faxed through to them.  Then to cap it all traffic rings to alter a reload destination at 18-00 hr just as I was going home it takes until 19
-00 hr to sort out by the time I have rung round drivers and sorted things out what a nice start back after weekend off oh well.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Things not too bad this morning everything quite normal and going smoothly.  My office colleague turns in does not 
seem too happy nothing changes I brief him as to what has been going on.  I then tell him two of the top managers are coming at about 10-30 his replied is good I }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 a talk with them but as soon as the time approaches for them to come he convenientl
y disappears out into yard and remains there most of time they are here the man does not help himself one little bit and I can assure you it was noticed and commented to me by managers on more than one occasion during day \endash 
 it is sad really.  They eventual
ly left Depot at about 17-00 hrs and said they would be back in the not too distant future for a Depot restructure read into that what you like oh dear.  Never mind off home we go early start in morning I am going out at 05-00 hr to assess drivers.
\par 
\par Thursd
ay.  Off I go with first driver for assessment we are going over to the North East to a dairy with milk the driver is in good spirits and gives a good well controlled drive a credit to himself.  After we have unload I change over after I have written out 
his report and I then return to Depot with another driver who is also delivering milk to some dairy once again another Good drive not a problem with either driver that\rquote 
s another two off my list only four more to go for this year unless they ask me to go to 
another Depot down country and help out.  When I get back to Penrith there is plenty of paper work to do but it all gets done and I go home at about 17-00hr a fair day I think.
\par 
\par Friday.  On my own again my colleague is having weekend off or so he thinks I 
start a weeks holiday on Sunday so he will have to come in that will spoil his fun never mind all goes well no one gives me any problems today reasonable finish get my supper then a bit of tuition on computer from a friend who takes computer classes but d
oes private tuition at peoples home if people requests her to do so yes she has taught me quite a bit to night I just hope I can remember what to do \endash  so many things to remember.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Reasonably quiet day set all up for next day ask men if they are p
repared to work an odd rest day next week as we are short of drivers on one or two day but you can only ask certain drivers to keep them legal with driver hours but people asked are quite willing to work.  I get on with paper work.  Get all sorted leave a
 note for my colleague tell what is going on.  I leave all ship shape and Bristol fashion off home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Go to Church with wife.  Vicar is late but never mind after Church we go and see wife\rquote s Mother then we go to my sons girlfriends house for a barbeque.  I got roped in to help with cooking of some of the food on barbeque and I don\rquote 
t burn anything good eh.  The afternoon goes of very well everyone enjoys them selves but oh dear it has to start and rain about 17-00 hrs and spoil the fun.  But never mind we have had a good afternoon so not so bad.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 33
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Not a bad morning take car into garage for some warranty work to be done they give me use of demonstrator car they would like me to change my car but I am not ready yet but never mind I will 
try it out give it a good run out not a bad car really performs quite well but I would rather have tried one with diesel engine in well that\rquote s two days of hols over.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  The wife and I go to her Mothers dig out some old raspberry canes in her garden
 they are well past it been there for years.  Take wife back home.  I then go to help to tidy some ropes and litter from Penrith show field it should have been done long before now but never mind it is done now.  I then take old canes and other rubbish fr
o
m Mother in Laws garden to local tip come home and have a bath the wife and I go to Penrith she has an appointment with Solicitor on a family problem she is meeting up with her sister and sister in law they are all going together so I have a wander around
 Penrith to fill time in.  They eventually come out things are complicated but they seem to getting somewhere at last.  We decide to go out for a bar meal seeing I am on holiday.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  I spend morning going round village doing a collection for Battle of Britain Wing Appeal do quite well.  In the afternoon we go and pick wife\rquote 
s Mother up also her brother who has suffered minor stroke and we take them for a ride out round the area where wife\rquote s Mother was born and brought up it was amazing how she could 
remember places of such a long time ago even though she is in early stages of Alzheimer\rquote 
s disease but the main thing is we had a very enjoyable afternoon.  But all good things come to an end.  Parish Council meeting tonight hope all goes well.  Yes things 
go not too bad lots of things get talked over no one falls out that makes a change for everyone to agree.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Had a lazy morning did a few odd jobs }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ed to cut lawn but too heavy a due on had to wait until after dinner before I could cut la
wn then wife and I popped into Penrith quite a lazy day but what are Holidays for.
\par 
\par Friday.  Another Glorious morning painted some spouts on house washed car and gave it a general clean.  Not a lot else was done another idle day.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Got up bright and early walked to next village about 3 miles away got a paper (Daily and Local Herald) got back had a quick look at papers watered green house and hanging basket got changed and }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  down village to fund raising do for Church.  Came back home got changed back into old clothes the time has come we have finally got building [}{\i\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 one word unclear \endash  plotted?}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ] sorted for Daughter & Son in law so that is to tidy up in preparation for foundations to be dug.  Also prepare for fence to go up round site.  Farmer we hav
e bought site of gives us the loan of a tractor to lead rubbish away at least some thing will get moving now not as fast as we }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  but at least it is a start.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Go and pick up my friend and his wife the four of us are going to have a day off
 together we are going to Morecambe there is a vintage car show and air display.  We get there have problems to find a car park every body and their mothers seem to be there.  The place is heaving we have a very enjoyable day car show was very good air di
splay was really good Red arrows and all.  Then we set of for home traffic jams but we get away eventually call in a pub for a bar meal which was very good we eventually arrive home about 22-00 hrs fair day I think but it just ended week nicely.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 34
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Checked wife\rquote 
s car over brakes and the lot all O.K.  Checked oil and water in mine O.K. as well.  Go with my friends wife to accompany her to do ballot for a future Blue faced Leicester sale entries were well down on two years ago for same sale it
 is times like this when you see the damage F&M has done to farming industry and I feel it will show for some time yet.  Yes there seems to be a lot of animals in the fields but it is not back up to the quantity there was before F&M. and it will take time
 before there is a good number of quality stock available to fill the needs of the market despite lots of Dairy farmers who seem to be over producing there are still some dairy farmers who have not yet replaced their dairy herds.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work oh 
hell what joys have we in store better than I expected not a lot of problems day goes quite well my mate is on good form so that helps the day go smoothly even get a reasonable early finish and of home.  Get home and wife tells me one of our little Grandd
aughter staying the night she is in bed asleep she is only three years old bless her so I will have to be quiet.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Not too bad a start to day my mate in office does not seem too bad but he has a good right to be in good spirits he starts almost three weeks holiday tonight.  But no it can\rquote 
t last doom and gloom sets in with him just after dinner I sometimes think a good kick up the backside would do him a power of good.  He seems as if he has an uncanny knack of being able to take a negative view of
 things and unfortunately senior management notices this and has commented to me on numerous occasions about it I just try to ignore but one can not do this all the time.  Never mind of home super and a bath then off to a school Governors meeting all }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  well.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Not a bad morning area field officer rang to check if any more farms had returned recently after F&M. as she }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ed to up date her records but no there was none but it was surprising on looking through the lists of farms that }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 went}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  down wi
th F&M. have not come back in yet and also the ones who say they are not going to return and also the ones who Rae still undecided what to do it is sad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  a lot of these farmers I class as }{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 friend}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 s of mine which does not help one to get F&M. out of ones system.  No wonder there is lots of people ill who are connected the farming world.  That\rquote 
s enough for now lets look on the bright side the weather is not too bad for time of year.  Now I have had a phone call from senior management how many loads of milk
 can I do for Reload by mid day my replied is give me the reload tanks and the milk and I will give you as many as you }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  I don\rquote t think that was the answer he }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ed but at least he saw my point and came down to earth and discussed it in a more sensible way explaining what was }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ed and from that he got the answer from me that he was looking for simple isn\rquote 
t it when things are fully explained to one I said and he just laughed and thanked me for my help and asked if he put idea into operatio
n middle of next week would I be prepared to give it a go my replied was no problem I put phone down thought oh shit I hope I can make it work or I might have a lot of explaining to do not to bad a finish to night have a bite to eat then put car trailer o
n to go for some posts to fence Daughter and Son in Laws building plot of that\rquote s another day done.
\par 
\par Friday.  Not a bad morning this weather is just great get things sorted hope things will go smoothly for day but no some one has to spoil it Senior managemen
t are on again tormenting about how many loads I can do before 12-00 hrs my replied again is give me the milk and reload tanks and I will do as many as you }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
 not a lot said then he replied leave it with me I will get back to you I put phone down and think that\rquote 
s the answer I gave you yesterday now you might leave me in peace.  I hope but no.  Later in day asking if I have reload trailer No so and so it is to desire my replied yes we have it and I can not afford to let it be desired I am short enough of t
railers as it is plus you are }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 want}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
ing me to do more work so there is no way I can part with it or any other once more he gives in. I have a feeling they are testing me out for something.  The rest of day goes not too bad good early finish.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Another great day no problems at work things go }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 really}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  well but what will happen to morrow I wonder not a lot to report today.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Another nice morning but yes we have delays at Blaydon Dairy reload tanks slow in coming back causes a back log farm collec
tion vehicles can not get emptied do a few alterations with a load or two to get them all emptied to get them off out for their last loads of day knowing fine well there will be problems when they come back and yes there is finally I say to drivers you ne
e
d not all stay back to empties your vehicles when we get some reload tanks back the yard man and I will see to them we get some emptied then run out of room again finally at about 19-00 hr I say sod it we are going home I will come in at 06-00 in morning 
and empties whets left if we have any tanks to put it in what a long day.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 35
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Go in for 06-00 get all milk emptied ready for farm collections men to go out on time then I go into office to sort yesterdays figures out now that I have got all 
milk transhipped into reload tanks.  I can get D Goo fuel sheet plus other things that I was unable to complete last night.  Will I have enough reload tanks today yes if they come back as they should but alas they do not come to a stand still at about 13-
3
0 bloody hell now what I struggle through yard man is just laughing its a good job he is not an ill natured man.  We mange somehow to get them all emptied to go for last loads and we finally get all unloaded by 19-00 hrs what a long day I am getting to ol
d for all this hassle.  Of home I go have a meal then have a walk to help me relax.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  What joys have we today I wonder I start by chasseing senior management for reload trailers I am told there is no spare ones to be had to this I say you are expec
ting me to put 420000 litres onto reload I can not load it into thin air I get no replied to this.  One good thing come out of day suspected F&M in Cornwall has been confirmed as negative what a relief just when you think it has all gone we still get remi
nders just what might be again if people are not careful.  All farm collections vehicles done and sorted and I have my paper work done and off home at more sensible time.  I decide to cut lawn before it gets dark and due comes down then I have my supper.

\par 
\par W
ednesday.  Well can I do it not enough trailers but someone might see sense.  Yes one or two spare trailers turn up things are going well all senior management keep out of the way as usual when there is a lot to sort out but they are maybe best out of roa
d we actually succeed in loading all extra milk and not too bad a finish it was quite a relief but at least I proved I could do it even though we have limited space and a severe shortage of trailers.  Good eh.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Today may be a bit of an anticlimax
 after yesterday but at least it has got all the other Depots talking and asking me how I did it my replied is we are the tops we have a good team that I can relief on when needs bee some asked how did you find room to park all the trailers my replied to 
that was we fit them in with a shoehorn and take them out with a tin opener but the point is we did it but none of senior management congratulates us oh no that would be too much to ask never mind.
\par 
\par Friday.  The start of another trying day it is quite a str
ain when you are left on your own to run things day in day out whilst other people go on holiday a week or ten days is not too bad but it starts to wear a bit then when it gets to nearly three weeks at a time but I plod on even if I do get a bit stressed 
my wife is starting to get a bit sick of me doing nothing else but work.  I can not say I blame her.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Not even any of office girls in today so I will have to do the computer work to day as well and I am not a fan of computers as it is but I get it done am ready to e-mail all info away and computer freezes on me so I ring one of the office girls
 to see what I can do the answer is nothing switch it of leave it for five or ten minuets it will be O.K. when you switch it on again.  But I will have to fax all paper work to head office it\rquote 
s a good job I have taken a print out of all I have done.  The rest of day gets by with not too many problems and not to bad a finish.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Not a lot to report today just same old problems as day goes by things get worse yard man on holidays so I am }{\f0\fs24\insrsid11096606 having}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  to use a driver and obviously he is not used to the job but
 I keep going down from office and give him a hand and I get through the day but not too early a }{\f0\fs24\insrsid11096606 finish}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  for a Sunday night but never mind }{\f0\fs24\insrsid11096606 that\rquote s}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393  another week over.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 36
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  I go in this morning and think keep your pecker up and you will get thro
ugh once more we are waiting on trailers hold ups at Dairy in North East it is not too clever it just increases operating cost because men are to pay overtime to get job done but what has to be has to be it is no good }{\insrsid11096606 worrying}{
\insrsid12528393  my self unduly I keep telling my self but it is not easy but once more we get through day I }{\insrsid11096606 don\rquote t}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid11096606 know}{\insrsid12528393 
 how but at least when any one comes in to office or rings one up they know they have to tread carefully but all staff are being }{\insrsid11096606 very}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid11096606 helpful}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid11096606 except}{
\insrsid12528393  for one driver but I sometimes think he was born to be awkward but I }{\insrsid11096606 suppose}{\insrsid12528393  it takes all sorts.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  The start of another month where has this year gone time just seems to be }{\insrsid11096606 fleeing}{\insrsid12528393  by but at least the good weather is keeping up it will be pleasing farmers as well as Holliday maker
s not a lot to report to day.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Lots of paperwork to do to day in between helping driver who is doing }{\insrsid11096606 transhipping}{\insrsid12528393  of milk from farm collections vehicles to reload tanks he is doing quite well }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 
 but I do whish proper yard man was back but we will get by.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Not too good to day put in a bad night I do not know if it is stress from overwork or I am just out of sorts but I improve as day goes by and not to bad a }{\insrsid11096606 finish}{\insrsid12528393  just as well because I have a School }{
\insrsid11096606 Governess}{\insrsid12528393  meeting to attend to night and I get there on time meeting goes off quite well we have some laughs at some of the }{\insrsid11096606 comments}{\insrsid12528393  from parents but it was all quite light hearted.

\par 
\par Friday.  Not a bad morning Area manager is back from }{\insrsid11096606 holidays}{\insrsid12528393  says he will call in before Noon and yes he does we discus one or two things I explain I have a big }{\insrsid11096606 imbalance}{\insrsid12528393 
 in the difference in the milk we are collecting each day caused by farmers }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393 ing to go alternate day collection and }{\insrsid11096606 also}{\insrsid12528393 
 one of our big producing farmers has left us to go to another Dairy company and I have not had time to sort them out properly but I will keep looking at them and if I do not get them done over week end my office }{\insrsid11096606 colleague}{
\insrsid12528393  is back on Sunday he can sort them out while I have a week off I have a late }{\insrsid11096606 finish}{\insrsid12528393  to night figur
es will not work out right for me but they do eventually after I get a bit cross with my self and get a bit up tight good job every one has gone home.
\par 
\par Saturday.  I can not get through to day quick enough so I hope there are not too many problems to make me stressed out and up tight before I start my weeks }{\insrsid11096606 holidays}{\insrsid12528393  but yes a driver }{\insrsid8078572 want}{
\insrsid12528393 s his load changed as he is having difficulty getting into a farm I think to my self you have been getting into it okay for this last six months what is his problem but I change it }{\insrsid11096606 incise}{\insrsid12528393 
 he does bump his vehicle or do some damage to a building better be safe than sorry.  The rest of day goes }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 
 well all figures add up at end of day.  I leave note for my mate to tell him what is going on and hope all is OK. }{\insrsid11096606 For}{\insrsid12528393  him.
\par 
\par Sunday.  What a relief }{\insrsid11096606 don\rquote t}{\insrsid12528393 
 need to go to work so I can help Son in law to prepare building site I go to local farmer who we bought plot of land off to borrow a tractor and trailer to lead soil away as we are going to take top soil of and level site in }{\insrsid11096606 prepara
tion}{\insrsid12528393  for when the builders start it takes us all day but at least it is a start and at least we get it cleared when it is dry and there is no puddle up.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 37
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Take car to garage to get it checked over I have been complaining about a knock which seems to be coming from the rear }{\insrsid11096606 suspension}{\insrsid12528393  but garage }{\insrsid11096606 don\rquote t}{\insrsid12528393  seem to }{
\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  to know about it as it is still under warranty and they will not be }{\insrsid11096606 making}{\insrsid12528393  any money out of me but yes they }{\insrsid11096606 finally}{\insrsid12528393  agree there is }{
\insrsid11096606 something}{\insrsid12528393  and try to sort it and let me have it back to see if I am happy.  We decide to go of for a couple of days to Oban in Scotland we had }{\insrsid11096606 half}{\insrsid12528393  agreed to meet some }{
\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 s who are }{\insrsid11096606 also}{\insrsid12528393  going to Oban for a break and asked if we would like to join them so of we go around about 12-00 hrs have quite a r
easonable run up to Oban.  When we get there I contact place where they are staying to see if there are any vacancies and yes there is so we find their place of B&B and join them needless to say all four of us are pleased to see each other as it is a whil
e since we last met up.  We then retire to our rooms freshen up and meet again in dinning room for our evening meal.  Sit and talk after meal for quite a while get caught up on things then retire to bed.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Start the day with a good hearty breakfast then decide where we are going for day our }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 s }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393 
 to go to see a Garden so we load ourselves into one car and off we set have a good look round garden which is owned by National Trust and covers a good few acres I did not realise there was so many different species of }{\insrsid11096606 Rhododendrons}{
\insrsid12528393  it was quite [}{\i\insrsid12528393 couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\insrsid12528393 
] needles to say most of shrubs trees and plants were past the flowering stage even so what was left in flower was quite nice and there was some quite interesting pla
nts.  We then drove on as far as Lockgilphead had a look round a cup of tea and a bun then drove quietly back to our B&B freshened up then had our evening meal and sat and talked till quite late again then of to bed.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Had a good breakfast then off into Oban to have a look round.  Oban Whisky Distillery needless to say we were to late for first tour but we only had to wait for about an hour so we had a bit look round shops in Oban.  We then }{
\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  back to distillery had our tour bought my self a bottle of whisky we then had a cup of tea at a small cafe.  Then we said our good }{\insrsid11096606 byes}{\insrsid12528393  to our }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{
\insrsid12528393 s who were staying up at Oban for rest of week but we are }{\insrsid11096606 coming}{\insrsid12528393  home.  I have done well to get the wife to stay away fo
r two nights it has been like pulling into a short stay car park but at least it has been a change and a break away from work far away from work what a change.  We had a nice trouble free journey home no problems we called in to see Daughter and family th
en }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  and checked on }{\insrsid11096606 wife\rquote s}{\insrsid12528393  mother on way home then we got home and settled down for night }{\insrsid11096606 it\rquote s}{\insrsid12528393 
 nice to go away but it is nice to be back and your own }{\insrsid11096606 surroundings}{\insrsid12528393  and your own bed.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Not a bad morning quite a cold wind blowing but not too bad once you get }{\insrsid11096606 moving}{\insrsid12528393  about.  I decided to take a }{\insrsid11096606 piece}{\insrsid12528393 
 of stone wall down on the Son in Law and Daughter building plot it will make it easier for vehicles to get in and out }{\insrsid11096606 especially}{\insrsid12528393  when building materials start to arrive unfortunate Winter is fast }{\insrsid11096606 
approaching}{\insrsid12528393  so that no doubt will hold things up a bit which seems such a shame after all this good weather we have been }{\insrsid11096606 having}{\insrsid12528393 
.  Never mind it will have been a good help to the Farmers getting their crops of the land whilst it has been }{\insrsid11096606 dire}{\insrsid12528393 .  I was rather }{\insrsid11096606 surprised}{\insrsid12528393  not to see more sheep in the }{
\insrsid11096606 fields}{\insrsid12528393  in Scotland as they would no doubt have problems getting shot of their }{\insrsid11096606 surplus}{\insrsid12528393  stock last year due to F&M.
\par 
\par Friday.  A what miserable morning I decided to have a sort out in the Greenhouses throw some of the }{\insrsid11096606 Tomatoes}{\insrsid12528393  Plants out that had }{\insrsid11096606 finished}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid11096606 producing}{
\insrsid12528393  fruit.  I then decided to clean my work shop out what a mess where do I start I think a skip might have been a good thing but no some of the }{\insrsid11096606 stuff}{\insrsid12528393 
 I should be throwing out I keep the rest I throw out not a lot else done as I am working away think not long till Tuesday morning now and back in to work never mind it has been a nice break away from it all.
\par 
\par Saturday.  I go to local Auction with my }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393  there is a tup sale on Quality sheep were }{\insrsid11096606 making}{\insrsid12528393  a good price otherwise ordinary tups were not }{\insrsid11096606 marketing}{
\insrsid12528393  a }{\insrsid11096606 fantastic}{\insrsid12528393  price so it was obvious Farmers were not just buying anything so that they could build their flocks up after F&M.  It was easy to see most of the farmers had not been able to put to the b
ack of their minds for the day it is still a common talking point }{\insrsid11096606 also}{\insrsid12528393  fairly }{\insrsid11096606 strict}{\insrsid12528393  bio security measures were being taken plenty of Defra }{\insrsid11096606 officials}{
\insrsid12528393  about and }{\insrsid11096606 plant}{\insrsid12528393  of footbaths about so that every one could disinfect their boots and wellingtons on entrance to Auction and on }{\insrsid11096606 leavening}{\insrsid12528393  it again.  The }{
\insrsid11096606 wife}{\insrsid12528393  and I decided to go out for a meal at night then called in at Daughter and Son in Laws house on way back home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  }{\insrsid8078572 Went}{\insrsid12528393  to Church it was the Harvest }{\insrsid11096606 thanksgiving}{\insrsid12528393  service I thought it was a poor turn out not many congregation at all but never mind those that }{\insrsid8078572 went}{
\insrsid12528393  had a nice Service and even the Vicar talked at }{\insrsid11096606 length}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid11096606 during}{\insrsid12528393 
 his service about how F&M had affected the Farming industry and how they were fighting back and getting stocked up again.  In the afternoon we had all the family here for Lunch Daughter Son in Law and Grand Children }{\insrsid11096606 also}{
\insrsid12528393  our Son and his Girl}{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393  we all had a good crack and had an enjoyable afternoon.  But oh it was quiet when they all }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  home.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 38
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  A wet miserable 
morning I had to get the Daughter and youngest Grandchild to Infirmary for 08-30 hr as the Grandchild had to have a check up but thank fully all was O.K.  We picked some front brake pads up for Daughters car on way home had a cup of tea when we got back t
o Daughters then I set to work and fitted brake pads to her car got that done had a bite to eat then tried car out all seemed to be O.K.  The Sons girl}{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393  turned up at }{\insrsid11096606 Draughts}{\insrsid12528393 
 for a quick visit then she }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  of home and the wife and I decided to go home
 and leave the Daughter and give a bit of breathing space before the Grandchildren came home from school.  It must be getting near Christmas the wife has decided to start and make Christmas Cakes but at least hopefully we might be able to put F&M to the b
ack of our minds for Christmas this year.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work what joys have we to go back to my mate says we should do this we should do that my answer is yes you could well be right but what have you done while I have been of for a week things do not seem to have changed since I }{
\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  of.  Then head office comes on they }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  all the drivers assessed }{\insrsid11096606 including}{\insrsid12528393 
 the Independent operations as well a bit of a tall order but I will try.  So I discus it with my office mate and I decide to do two on Wednesday i
t will mean an early start but that does not cause me a problem.  I do not hang about at night get paper work sorted and away home.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Nice early start up at 03-00 to meet up with first driver that I am going to assess we leave Penrith at 04-00 a
nd set of for Blaydon.  Not the best of mornings weather wise but it could be worse the driver I am checking works for one of the Independent operations we use no serious problems what problems there is I point out to him and he corrects them and we get o
n fine.  Now I change over and come back with one of our own drivers in another vehicle it is quite }{\insrsid11096606 tiring}{\insrsid12528393 
 because you have not to miss a move whilst you must stay relaxed so that you do not put driver you are assessing on edge.  But we have no problems dri
ver just gets on with it and I give him a good report.  Then I spend an hour or two in office then go home early as I am going out of office my mate says he will not be in }{\insrsid11096606 until}{\insrsid12528393 
 Monday is it O.K. my answer is what ever then get into car and think am I too 
soft then think well if he is not then I will not have any moaning.  He rings me at about 19-00 hrs to put me in picture and tell me what is loaded to go out through night then puts the phone through to me.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Nice }{\insrsid11096606 peaceful}{\insrsid12528393  day no one moaning no one creating problems.  Things are going smoothly paper work is even all correct figures add up nothing out of ordinary to report.
\par 
\par Friday.  Back to the grind not such a smooth day to day reload duties are }{\insrsid11096606 continually}{\insrsid12528393  this I can cope with }{\insrsid11096606 until}{\insrsid12528393  night comes 
just as I am going home fax goes and guess what they have upped my allocation of milk for reload my }{\insrsid11096606 immediate}{\insrsid12528393 
 reaction is I have not got enough trailers to do it with so I have to sit down and make some rather pleading phone calls to get some extra trailers from somewhere everyone says sorry we have no spare trailers at our Depot but I do }{\insrsid8078572 
eventually}{\insrsid12528393  win three which is a start so of I go home.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Not looking forward to today still will have to look for more trailers fortunately depots are more forth
 coming this morning has some one said something to them from higher up I quite easily win another two trailers and more available if I need them that puts things on a brighter footing for rest of day even though it is hard frost and bitterly cold night c
omes paper work completed figures all add up yard full of trailers what will tomorrow bring?
\par 
\par Sunday.  Another hard frost cold again yard man can not get }{\insrsid11096606 shunted}{\insrsid12528393  started but we get it going with a jump start now then have we got enough trailers for all milk
 we are loading things seem to be going O.K. another empty trailer arrives for me.  Good.  By night it }{\insrsid11096606 seems}{\insrsid12528393 
 we have enough trailers then I get a phone call to say a farm collection vehicle has broken down on exit slip road of Motorway }{\insrsid11096606 that\rquote s}{\insrsid12528393  all I need police }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  it moved }{
\insrsid11096606 immediately}{\insrsid12528393  but it is not that easy call someone out to it but it can not be repaired and we have to get a heavy wrecker in to tow wagon back to Depot yard man and I }{\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\insrsid12528393  get }
{\insrsid11096606 finished}{\insrsid12528393  at 19-30 not bad for a Sunday night is it.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 39
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Doom and gloom is back in this morning but I soon give him a shock when I say we are short of drivers would you mind doing a farm collection }{\insrsid11096606 duties}{\insrsid12528393  today he does not hurry to get his things to }{
\insrsid11096606 gather}{\insrsid12528393  to take a vehicle out but eventually h
e gets going with a smile on his face I feel a bit sorry for him as it is raining quite heavily and it will not be much fun going round farms in the rain.  Rest of day is going quite well odd load change on reload side but nothing serious night comes and 
am fighting to get all paper work in and figures added up and blow me my mate is standing in middle of yard with a }{\insrsid11096606 handful}{\insrsid12528393  of paperwork as if it was not needed }{\insrsid11096606 until}{\insrsid12528393  next week I }
{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  down and checked one or two reload trailers he still did not attempt to bring it up stairs to office so I go and ask him for it he realises I am a bit }{\insrsid11096606 annoyed}{\insrsid12528393 
 with him but I make light of it least said easiest mended.  Fortunately everything }{\insrsid11096606 gels}{\insrsid12528393  and all figures are correct.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Not too bad a start to the day every thing going well }{\insrsid11096606 until}{\insrsid12528393  about 10-00 hr I was just }{\insrsid11096606 finishing}{\insrsid12528393 
 some work on computer and was going to photo copy some more paper work and the electric }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  off first I thought it was just a fuse tripped out but we
 quickly realised the whole of the industrial estate was of in fact }{\insrsid11096606 half}{\insrsid12528393 
 of Penrith some told me later.  We were at a loss we had no electric to work pumps to tranship milk from Farm collection vehicles to reload tanks my office colleague said at least we 
can have a cup of tea I have just boiled the kettle so at least he had done something positive.  We sat and }{\insrsid11096606 discussed}{\insrsid12528393  things for a while then I }{\insrsid11096606 suggested}{\insrsid12528393 
 we look to see if we could hire a generator to make some power for pumps to off load vehicles but I re
alised this may be a tall order as we needed a generator that would drive a three phase pump but there was two Plant hire firms on estate we could try so off I }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393 
 but no all they had was single phase generators.  No good.  The phones were down all we had
 was mobiles and batteries were going down on them and no means of charging them.  We eventually got power back on about 12-00 h so it was not too bad it could have been worse and we did not have too many delays the rest of day }{\insrsid8078572 went}{
\insrsid12528393  quite well but is times like this that }{\insrsid11096606 allows}{\insrsid12528393  one to sit back and think about the past and how much better a power cut was than all the upheaval we had when F&M. was }{\insrsid11096606 raging}{
\insrsid12528393  amongst us at least when power came back on we were up and running I am afraid not so with F&M we are still recovering from this terrible disease and will be for a number of years yet sadly.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Another Wet morning one takes badly with this weather after all the nice weather we have had recently but we will just have to get on with it and accept }{\insrsid11096606 winter}{\insrsid12528393  is }{\insrsid11096606 almost}{
\insrsid12528393 
 on us.  But at least there will be no spraying at farms and the vehicles this Winter no driver ringing in to say their spray was frozen and they could not spray vehicles what had they to do as they were reluctant to go into farm for a bucket of
 warm water to thaw spray out because they were not }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393  allowed to enter farm without spraying themselves and vehicle but we used to overcome it one way or another.  Day goes quite well an early }{\insrsid11096606 
finish}{\insrsid12528393  what a pleasant change I even had to chase my mate off home and }{\insrsid8078572 usually}{\insrsid12528393  he is first to go.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Quite frost this morning first thing but it soon turns to rain but that does not last too long and the Sun comes out and it is quite bright but cool.  This weather is not helping milk production it is falling off fairly fast but I }{
\insrsid11096606 suppose}{\insrsid12528393  it had to farmers could not carry on pushing milk out of their cows the way some of them had been.  Some of them who returned after }{\insrsid11096606 having}{\insrsid12528393 
 F&M just seemed to have no stopping place one would }{\insrsid11096606 almost}{\insrsid12528393  say they were trying to catch up on lost time which I think was a bit silly but that is just my thoughts my mate needless to say once more is }{
\insrsid11096606 having}{\insrsid12528393  a day of as he on himself this week end he probably needs a day of to prepare himself for it poor fellow.  Once again not too bad a }{\insrsid11096606 finish}{\insrsid12528393 
 to day all vehicles in every one gone home paper work done all figures add up so why am I still here so off I go home.
\par 
\par Friday.  Not too bright a start did not feel like doing anything but needs must lot of }{\insrsid11096606 rubbish}{\insrsid12528393  to tidy up in back garden ready 
for a bonfire when it dries out then I start in front garden.  Going not too bad stop for a bite to eat about 12-30 just sitting relaxing and I get a phone call from Daughter to say her and }{\insrsid11096606 family}{\insrsid12528393  are }{
\insrsid11096606 coming}{\insrsid12528393  and her Husband }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  to start and dig water pipe
 trench on building site so I will get a change of jobs we start and dig track get on quite well when we can keep Grandchildren out of trench we are all covered in mud by time we finish for day.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Back to site this morning only one Grandchild today that is much better but he is to watch to keep out of trench we finish trench drop pipe inside a larger pipe so that if it is ever to repair it will be easier to pull out of }{
\insrsid11096606 trucking}{\insrsid12528393  pipe than digging it all out again we finally call it a day at about 16-00 hr go home and have something to eat.
\par 
\par Sunday.  On dear what a wet morning and windy I decide the best spot is to stay in bed so I have a good lie in when I do get up I decide to go for a walk as it seems to be [}{\i\insrsid12528393 couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{
\insrsid12528393 ] go far before it starts raining and it is bitterly cold so I turn round and head back for home.  Just sit about read paper and do fina}{\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 
ly get out for a walk.  Daughter and Son in Law and Grand children come for Sunday Lunch quite hectic for three or f
our hours but I have seen them worse.  Either I am getting used to the mayhem they cause or they are getting better.  After they have all gone home I sit back and think about things and yes F.M. comes into my mind and I wonder was there any one who was no
t
 affected by F.M. in some way or other I am convinced there was not it must have affected everyone somehow or other then I think of the silly price that was paid for Swaledale Ram and I think some of the farmers may well have been overpaid in compensation
 for their livestock if they can pay silly prices for replacements when I am sure there is no need to do it but as usual money talks I am afraid sad }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 
 when I feel some of them could with a little thought spend it more wisely.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 40
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Got up
 had a bite of Breakfast and went into front garden prepared a flower bed planted some Daffodils and Tulips to come up and bloom in the Spring then the wife and I go and visit her Mother see to her needs then go to Carlisle and do a bit of sho}{
\insrsid1785296 p}{\insrsid12528393 ping takes longer than expected but who cares what can you do this weather.  We are going out for a meal with Son and his Girl}{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 
 so I will have to get a bath and get changed now that clocks are changed and it gets dark sooner you do not feel like moving out at night but if anyone sits in you can soon go stale and miserable.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work nothing out of way going on other than extra reloads thrown at us but not enough trailers to do it with but as usual we get through somehow don}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 t ask me how day ends not too bad.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  On my own once more my office colleague of again he is taking his son for his driving test he may pass this time he failed last one.  Get a phone call to say top management are going to be here tomorrow for a Depot Audit and staff ass
essment oh dear I have never had one of these before so here is hoping I still have a job at end of it.  They will be human I hope never mind what will be will be so I just get my head down and get on with my work it all brings night and of I go home and 
think lets hope I live to fight another day and try not to get too stressed up.  I had enough of that with F&M and its problems.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Yes we are here and senior management turn up by about 09-00 I just try to make my self be occupied with other thing
s and hope they will leave me alone.  They do Depot Audit first which takes a long time I think yes they find one or two things wrong not to serious though thankfully.  The day drags on then finally at about 17-30 they say they are going to do their }{
\insrsid1785296 Appraisals}{\insrsid12528393  on my colleague and me they start with my colleague it takes }{\insrsid1785296 until}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid1785296 apron}{\insrsid12528393 
 20-30hrs and I think to my self what time are going to be through with me they take me in and start and at about 21-30 hrs they give up and say can I go to another Depot where they are going to be to morrow I say yes fine I get them of the }{
\insrsid1785296 premises}{\insrsid12528393  and get locked up and off home its been a long day.
\par 
\par Friday.  Go in to work do a bit in office check trailers have a talk with my colleague ask him how his }{\insrsid1785296 appraisal}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393 
 and he shrugs his shoulders and says not to bad but he seems a bit }{\insrsid1785296 disillusioned}{\insrsid12528393  then of I go to the Depot where they are to day they }{\insrsid1785296 finally}{\insrsid12528393 
 decide to start with me about 11-00 hr and they finish at about 13-00 hrs thank fully because I had had enough but in all honesty it all }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  better than I expected but I am told I will have to re }{\insrsid1785296 
apply}{\insrsid12528393  for my job they as}{\insrsid1785296 s}{\insrsid12528393 ure me it is just a formality as this is normal practice I wonder.  Then it is of back to my Depot and of course every one greets me 
with how did you come on with them then my replie}{\insrsid1785296 d}{\insrsid12528393  is pleasantly su}{\insrsid1785296 r}{\insrsid12528393 
prised and I was quite pleased all seemed to have gone well.  Then I got my head down with paper work in office and got it all sorted out and of home.  I have a feeling I am going to have a grue}{\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 
ling week end on my own.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Morning again everything going well then the bombshell is dropped can you do fifteen reloads on Sunday I say yes if I can have more trailers but no one at any other Depot seems to have any spare ones but I keep trying and I }{\insrsid8078572 
eventually}{\insrsid12528393  win two not enough but it will do for a start rest of day goes not too bad all comes together by night thankfully.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Problems all day not enough trailers hold ups but not as much as I had expected drivers seem to understand problems and do not hassle me too much.  I finally get through at 19-00 hr another long day what a week this has been.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 41
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Well there is two of us in office to day so life should be easier but no such luck they }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393  us to do seventeen loads Tuesday what with I do not know I even don}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{
\insrsid12528393 t know if we have room to park them all but we will see.  The yard comes to a stand still at about 15-30 hr no trailers for reload so how can we cope tomorrow when we are loading more than ever.  To put tin 
hat on it we get phone call to say Senior management are returning to talk to us bloody hell as if we had not plenty to do with out them how can anyone relax another late finish today.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  What joys have we to day oh dear one man has not taken a load flat tyre but at least he had sense to take another trailer that was loaded for later in day to give us a cha}{\insrsid1785296 n}{\insrsid12528393 
ce to get puncture repaired.  Yes they have arrived who are they going to take first to day oh hell it is me this time but once more I am pleasantly su}{\insrsid1785296 r}{\insrsid12528393 pris}{\insrsid1785296 e}{\insrsid12528393 
d with what they have to say to me either I am underestimating my self or they have a lot of confidence in me.  I hope I do not let them down.  Now it is my colleagues turn he comes out a bit subdued but what can I do to cheer him up but he so
on perks up when he realises yard is at a stand still no trailers for reload at least it takes his mind off things another lat end to day but at least figures are right and he is off to morrow so guess who is on his own again am I dedicated or just willin
g I do not know but I think well it is better than F&M last year and take consolation from that.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Not a bad start to day every one seems quite happy and getting on with milk collection no one broken down plenty of trailers for reload in fact it 
just seems too good but no all goes well all day figures add up not to bad a finish considering work we are doing at moment.
\par 
\par Thursday.  A day on my own again my office colleague is sup}{\insrsid1785296 p}{\insrsid12528393 osed to going out to collect milk to day as we are short of drivers bu
t he has not arrived in yet he would soon have had something to say if the regular drivers had been late he eventually arrives in at about 08-00 then is in no hurry to go out and collect milk not good enough really it leaves us wide open for criti}{
\insrsid1785296 cis}{\insrsid12528393 m when we ap}{\insrsid1785296 p}{\insrsid12528393 
roach a driver if he is late but at least he is here.  Day goes quite well I am kept busy not a lot of time to myself I am even eating out of my bait box as I am doing other things it just seems one thing after another but it all brings night all do
ne up and dusted by 18-00 which is really good because it has been 19-00 h and after for over a week now.
\par 
\par Friday.  Day of and am I ready for it but all it }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 s to do is rain and rain and rain where is it all coming from.  I decide to make a bird ta
ble to put in front garden so that the birds can feed through the winter and it is also quite interesting to watch them especia}{\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 
ly the Blue Tits my brother has a one in his Garden and there is even woodpeckers feed of his I make a start to make a table jus
t tack pieces of wood together at first to see what it will look like then I start to pull it to bits does not look to be what I }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 
 a piece of wood comes off a bit easier than I expected and hit me on the nose my specs fly of and there is blood every where.  I decide sod it I will go out and buy a proper ready made one knowing it will look better than anything I will make.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Go to my sons and give him a hand with a few jobs he }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 s doing then I have a look round Saturday Market th}{\insrsid1785296 e}{\insrsid12528393 r}{\insrsid1785296 e}{\insrsid12528393 
 is usually a stall selling Garden furniture and bird tables there but not this week sods law I suppose.  When I get back home I have a clean up in back and front garden front mainly clean all fallen leaves and fallen apples up and load them inot trailer 
ready to take to local refuse tip I then clean lawn mower up and spray it with oil and put it away for Winter I then wash car it is in a shocking state.  The wife and I decide to go out for a bar meal we have a change of venue to where we usually go it wa
s a bit expensive but is was good and we both enjoyed the meal.  We then called on some }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 s we had not seen for a while had a good crack put the world to rights then decided to go home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Remembrance day.  We go to local village war memorial where there is usually a short service for the war dead then we go on to wife}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 
s mothers and get her sorted for day then it is back home before the Grand children turn up.  I go for a walk with the youngest one in her pushchair needless to say she falls asleep
 before I get back home.  But it does her good.  We all have Sunday lunch then they have a bit play then off they go home with their Mum an Dad.  Peace.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 42
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Monday.  The start of another week.  I take garden rubbish to tip then start to look for a pla
ce that our friends told us about on Saturday night that sold Bird Tables not too bad to f}{\insrsid1785296 i}{\insrsid12528393 
nd but too many to choose from but eventually I pick one and get some bird seed at same time pay for it and off I go home with it it looks quite good really far bett
er than anything I would have made.  I have to go into work this afternoon for an interview at work this is the third one in about a fortnight there is not a lot of need for this in my mind but the powers that be know best hope it is not too long I have a
 
Parrish Council meeting to night.  Interview goes quite well lots of searching questions asked I only hope I gave correct answers.  Back home had some supper and off to P.C. Meeting turned out to a lengthy one a lot to get through but at last I can go to 
bed.  Hooray.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back in to work what joys have we to day not much I fear it is not long until I realise my colleague has tw}{\insrsid1785296 o}{\insrsid12528393 
 spare loads on his hands that should not be there oh bloody hell more hassle.  But fortunately one phone call and it is all
 sorted thank God that was a relief.  Workmen arrive to dig up part of Depot yard it is in a bad state pot holes every where it is total chaos for a while until vehicles can get them selves a pattern to negotiate the obstacle course that this has caused i
n
 yard this should have been done long since but with F&M. things got put off because of all the uncertainty that F&M caused yes it still has and will have a lot to answer for to anyone connected to the farming world.  The problems it caused I feel will ge
t people stressed up for a long while yet there are still lots of restrictions still in force and could I feel be there for a long while yet.  Rest of day has gone not too bad we get away home by 18-30 not good enough really.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  Day starts well get through a lot of paper work before anyone else comes in when my office colleague comes in he seems in quite a good mood.  There seems to be a lot of catching up on things today.  Area manager turns up he only holds things u
p then he an}{\insrsid1785296 n}{\insrsid12528393 
ounces Senior management are coming to see my colleague and myself tomorrow oh no not again.  Figures will not add up at end of day.  8000 litres plus adrift takes at least half an hour to find it and it turns out that it was caused by Depot th
at our area manager calls his home base good eh.  I will have to speak to them tomorrow a simple phone call from them earlier in day would have solved a problem that need not have happened it is finally 19-00 h when I get away home I leave my colleague pu
tting some work onto computer to EMail some information that we have sat on told not to bother about then suddenly at about 18-15 Senior management decide they }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 
 it yesterday type of thing not good enough.  But the day ends well I get home have some supper then watch foot ball on T.V. and yes my team Newcastle win and they will progress further in competition which will or should mean a lot of money for them.

\par 
\par Thursday.  Get up about 02-15 can not sleep make my self a cup of tea and have a bit read then go back to bed is it stress or what.  Back to the Grind my colleague one again is winding down for more days of and it looks as if I am in for a grue}{
\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 ling week end of reload is just going up and up and we just seem to get no extra trailers to do it with but no doubt I will stru}{\insrsid1785296 g}{\insrsid12528393 gle on and get through the weekend.
\par 
\par Friday.  I get phone call from one of top managers that the new role of Operations controller that they have been interviewing everyone for I am told that I have been one of the suc}{\insrsid1785296 ce}{\insrsid12528393 ssful on
es along with my colleague despite his bad points but none of us are perfect it is just up to me not to let the team down even though it may be a hard at times.  Then the bom}{\insrsid1785296 b}{\insrsid12528393 shell is dro}{\insrsid1785296 p}{
\insrsid12528393 ped Milk Movements tell me they }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  nineteen reloads done on Sunday so once again it is a scour the country to all our depots to see if anyone has any spare trailers I }{\insrsid8078572 eventually}{
\insrsid12528393  get the promise of two trailers extra not enough but it is better than none.  I am stru}{\insrsid1785296 g}{\insrsid12528393 gling to load what I have tonight if we don}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 t get some t
railers back shortly this is going to make a late finish but no one seems to care.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Not too bad a day considering the trailer shortage we seem to be getting trailers back reasonably well to day I end up at night short of milk to load trailers out for Sundays deliveries milk seems to be dro}{\insrsid1785296 p}{\insrsid12528393 
ping on farm collection side thankfully it may help things a bit.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Can I do it or cant I trailers are coming back slowly.  Delays at dairies are not helping as it stops me being able to off load farm c
ollection vehicles into reload then farmers start ringing up the tanker has not been for my milk and you have to explain why some are very understanding others are not.  What with all the stress I }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393 
 through with F&M wondering if we were going to keep ou
r jobs or not and now that it is hopefully over and they are producing far more milk than ever before one just feels as if there has been no respite to allow time to get back on an level working conditions again it just feels like a gradual grinding dow}{
\insrsid1785296 n}{\insrsid12528393  stage one wonders how much more one can take.  F&M has a lot to answer for.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 43
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  What a day first we have too much milk by mid afternoon we are a load short for reload the an}{\insrsid1785296 n}{\insrsid12528393 oying thing is we have asked Milk Movements for another destination
 to get shot of what seemed to be an extra load they gave us a destination but I have not no vehicle to take it with I contact a firm at Carlisle to see if we can hire a vehicle for a day they stru}{\insrsid1785296 g}{\insrsid12528393 
gle at first then say yes we can have one but not befor}{\insrsid1785296 e}{\insrsid12528393  1
1-00 hr so I take my office colleague down to Carlisle for it he gets it back to Depot and takes and delivers so called extra load that turns out not to be an extra load.  Now we will be playing catch up all week but I reckon if we are careful we will win
 it back by week end.  What with one thing and another it is quite a late finish tired and fed up.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Here we are again same old story no trailers they are not coming back quick enough.  I am feeling a bit down.  Nothing is going right even the reva
mp of C.I.P. system for washing milk tanker out is not going to plan.  But we will get there that I have no doubt still a load down when day end we have not won any back to day looks as if it is going to take getting back if it is not one thing it is anot
her but it all brings night.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  I decide to go out and assess a driver this morning of course I had to pick a wet cold miserable day hadn}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 t I.  Assessment goes quite well no problems at all also the run that I }{\insrsid8078572 
went}{\insrsid12528393  on the farmers that were on it were all people that I knew and they }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393 
ed to talk to me about all the problems they had had during F&M and how it had affected them some of them said it had given them time to sit back and look at the way they were farming and made them decide to concentr
ate more on milk production whilst some of their neighbours had decided to either give up farming or concentrate more on beef and sheep my self I feel some of them will not }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 
 know which is the best way to go for another year or two yet F&M has a lot to answer for it has disrupted peoples lives more than people are aware and it will be a long time before we are allowed to forget it and relax.  There will be restrictions on the
 Farming world and those connected with for a long}{\insrsid1785296 ,}{\insrsid12528393  long time to come especia}{\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 
ly on the movement of livestock.  Back in office whole load of paper work to get caught up on what has my colleague been doing all morning then he decides he }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393 s to pop down town says he will not be long ha ha}{
\insrsid1785296 .}{\insrsid12528393  }{\insrsid1785296  }{\insrsid12528393 I}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 ve heard that one before.  He also says he is having Thursday off that}{\insrsid1785296 \rquote }{\insrsid12528393 
s fine by me and by night comes we are starting to gain our load back we will win I am sure.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Fairly reasonable morning C.I.P. system is 
now completed but boiler has been condemned so we will have to give them cold washes and make arrangements to get them a hot wash at a local dairy it is never ending cant seem to get of phone sorting all these problems out but yes local dairy agrees to do
 it for a small cha}{\insrsid1785296 n}{\insrsid12528393 
ge we have no option but pay it as the tankers have to be washed out or we will soon have problems rest of day passes by fairly normal.  But figures will not add up when night comes more headaches sorting this out is it worth it I some t
imes feel like throwing the towel in but at least we are now only half a load down so something is working for me I am off home it is my Weekend off Hooray.
\par 
\par Friday.  Spend morning on Son in Laws & Daughters Building Site things seem as if they are starting to move at last builder has dug foundations I am bailing water out of them as the rain has filled them up.  Concrete is sup}{\insrsid1785296 p}{
\insrsid12528393 osed to be coming for foundations to day then I get a me}{\insrsid1785296 s}{\insrsid12528393 sage to say it is not.  It is coming tomorrow Saturday 09-00.  The wife a
nd I have make a quick visit to Penrith when we come back a load of building blocks have been brough}{\insrsid1785296 t}{\insrsid12528393 
 some of them right in gateway Ready Mix wagon will not get in with concrete in morning so I have to set to and move some of them and restack them by hand 
that keeps me out of mischief for most of afternoon I pop back down village for a cup of tea at about 16-00hr and a }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 
 calls in to say there is a vehicle in sight delivering some more block I say I hope not and if he is I hope he does not block gateway
 when I get there he is delivering sand and he has got stuck so he has to tip it smack bang in middle of gateway I pop and borrow a tractor from a local farm and soon have him out.  Now the sand will be to move or we will not get Ready Mix vehicle in with
 concrete in morning it is starting to get dark by now but it will be to do.  The Wife and I start too much for two old people but it is to do fina}{\insrsid1785296 l}{\insrsid12528393 ly Son in Law turns up and he gets stuck into it we }{\insrsid8078572 
eventually}{\insrsid12528393  win I am knackered I am not as young or as fit
 as I used to be.  Now for a quick bath and of to an emergency planning meeting for Parrish Council which I have had to call at short notice there is a lot of ill feeling in village over the plans and what it will entail.  There is a strong turn out and t
he villagers in no way }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  us to grant these plans I take a secret vote from Parish Council members and it is }{\insrsid1785296 unanimously}{\insrsid12528393 
 rejected which pleases people of Parish but I point out to them even though we will give our reasons and people of village reasons for
 these plans not to be granted it will be up to Eden District Council at end of the day but I do advise them if they feel strongly enough to organise a petition as soon as they can.  This has been a long hard day.
\par 
\par Saturday.  Up bright and early sorting th
ings out on building site ready for concrete to come but no builders by about 08-15hr.  I ring Son in Law to see what is going on he says they should be here so I continue sorting things out.  Son in Law ring me at about 08-40 to ask if any one has come I
 tell him no and if concrete comes at 09-00 hrs as it is sup}{\insrsid8078572 p}{\insrsid12528393 osed to there is no way I will [}{\i\insrsid12528393 couple of words unclear \endash  bad photocopying}{\insrsid12528393 
] by about 08-50 I am getting very irate and playing hell with every one concerned including Wife.  I then go back home an
d ring firm who are bringing concrete and they tell me Builder has cancelled it so at least that is a relief but why could he tell no one we need not have bust a gut moving sand last night by now there must be steam coming out of my ears.  I go upstairs h
ave a wash get changed and go to Penrith Market to have a walk round and see if I can find any bargains and try and cool down yes it works.  Wife and I are thinking of going to visit one of our Farmer }{\insrsid8078572 friend}{\insrsid12528393 
s who unfortunately }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393  down with F&M. they are up and running again now and like a lot more producing far more milk than they ever did before which I think is silly but that}{\insrsid8078572 \rquote }{
\insrsid12528393 s what they }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393  to do.
\par 
\par Sunday.  }{\v\insrsid12528393 Had}{\insrsid12528393 Had a good long lie on in bed this morning I think I needed it even if the Wife did not.  Had
 a good read at Papers after I had done a bit in Garden.  When the Son in Law and Daughter and Grandchildren came over Son in Law and I }{\insrsid8078572 went}{\insrsid12528393 
 onto Site for an hour or two but it soon comes in dark so we did not get a lot done.  Not a bad day }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 .
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Week 44
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
\par Monday.  Early start builders are on site.  Ready Mix coming at last things are starting to happen on site just a pity the weather is not so good.  First load of Ready Mix got in and out with out getting stuck I hope the next one does as I have to
 go into work for a meeting with top brass for what they call a team me}{\insrsid8078572 e}{\insrsid12528393 
ting at least they are talking of starting to replace some of the old vehicles that should have gone long since but the uncertainty F&M caused in the Farming industry and the shortage 
of milk it brought about it was silly to buy in fresh vehicles that may not be needed, but now there seems to be a glut of milk the future looks brighter but we have a long way to go before things are back to what they should be.  Meeting over I rush back
 home to see how things are progressing on site they have got second load of concrete onto site and vehicle of again no problem am I pleased I had visions of having to pull him of site so in all it has not been too bad a day.
\par 
\par Tuesday.  Back to work not too exciting a day this }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 s doing that }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 
s doing then my colleague says he is of from now until a week on Friday all this time off is beginning to wear a bit then but I must admit it is peaceful when he is not there.  Unfortunately farm collec
tion vehicles are running too fast and he has done nothing about it while I have had my week end off what has he been doing?  Never mind I will sort them out.
\par 
\par Wednesday.  On my own things are running fairly smoothly at the moment everyone seems to be quite happy doom & gloom is not in at work sad really it turns out to be quite an uneventful day things are going too well.
\par 
\par Thursday.  Problems from word go boiler that heats water for C.I.P. system has been condemned now we will have to get that sorted now I
 can not get on with my work for answering phone about C.I.P. boiler and trying to sort it out.  Then a driver comes in and says his vehicle is full oh bloody hell what next never mind night will come.
\par 
\par Friday.  Still fighting with boiler for C.I.P. system
 now it is going to cost too much for a replacement so we are having to look for another option to heat water.  Now another Driver has come in his vehicle is full where do I go from here.  I tell Senior management I need a bigger vehicle in place of a fou
r wheeler but I think it has fallen on deaf ears now we hear there is suspected F&M in Scotland are we going to start the merry go around again I hope not.  I do not }{\insrsid8078572 want}{\insrsid12528393 
 all that stress and uncertainty again.  Off home another day over am I pleased.
\par 
\par Satur
day.  Weekend yes we are short of reload trailers again no one seems to be listening when I ask for at least another two.  Then the drivers are starting to ask for a farm of their loads as they are full.  Just as one has finished asking me Area manager tu
rns up I trie}{\insrsid8078572 d}{\insrsid12528393  to explain the situation to him it does not sink in how tight the loads }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393  are.  Fina}{\insrsid8078572 l}{\insrsid12528393 
ly I can take no more and I am afraid and I blow up and he gets a few home truths even if he does not like it in fact we have quite a heated row but he does }{\insrsid8078572 eventually}{\insrsid12528393  back down and do a disa}{\insrsid8078572 p}{
\insrsid12528393 pearing act thankfully or I might have said something I should not have said.  After he has g}{\insrsid8078572 o}{\insrsid12528393 
ne I calm down have a cup of tea then settle down and do some load changes.  The drivers will not be too happy but the stress I have had lately I am not too worried }{\insrsid8078572 really}{\insrsid12528393 
.  Night comes and we are short of trailers but no one listens so I go home.
\par 
\par Sunday.  Start of another day start of another month what joys are we going to have today at least F&M scare in Scotland seems to
 be over.  Load changes seem to have gone down fairly well for a change.  Month End seems to bring a lot of extra paper work as if there is not plenty already.  What with paper work and fighting for extra trailers it has been a very trying day.  Senior ma
nagement starts to listen to me at about 18-00 hrs they will try to get me some extra reload trailers in to morrow ha ha.  Pigs might fly.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 45 02/12/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Farm collection vehicles are going to be delayed, that\rquote s the last thing I }{
\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393  as the farmers will be upset and we do not }{\insrsid8078572 never mind}{\insrsid12528393 
 that, there is enough unrest amongst them at the moment, what with milk prices and the announcement that Nestle are going to have cut backs and may be closing some of their factories. The good news is that restrictio
ns have been lifted in Scotland after recent FMD scares, thank God.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 47 16/12/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
A driver comes in a says that he has left too much milk at a farm which has gone onto every day collection instead of alternate days. He is another farmer that got FMD and has come back in and doesn\rquote 
t seem to know when to stop producing milk. It is silly really, they are complaining about the prices they are getting for their milk but just do not seem to know when to draw the line. As long as they are over producing the p
rice will not go up but I suppose the farmers that got FMD and have now come back in and are producing milk seem to be concentrating on milk more and not bothering with sheep or other methods. As I keep saying, it will be a long}{\insrsid8078572 ,}{
\insrsid12528393  long time before things are back to normal, if ever.  At least (work) is not as bad as having to sort out forms and runs when FMD was at its height.
\par 
\par I get a phone call from my cousin to wish us a merry Xmas. This is the one who got FMD and they took it very badly as they had done 
everything to try and prevent getting it. Obviously our conversation turned to how they were getting over it, if that is possible. He was telling me they had more sheep than they had before FMD, but not got fully stocked up with cattle yet. He thought the
r
e was no rush as most of their time in the spring would be taken up with the ewes lambing. He was saying that they were all tupped fairly quickly so he is expecting them all to lamb over a fairly short period instead of dragging on like it does some time.

\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 48 23/12/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 There\rquote 
s too much milk really, where does it all come from? What differences a year can make. There was not all this milk before FMD started, what are some of the farmers thinking about? They all complain they are not getting enough money
 for their milk and it is costing too much money to produce. You wouldn\rquote t think so though.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 49 30/12/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 A man from Eden Council on the health and e
nvironment side calls us at work to tell us that one of the farms we pick up has suspect TB in his dairy herd so we have to make sure that milk from this farm has to go to a dairy that will heat treat milk. Really, what he is telling us is that the milk n
e
eds to be pasteurised, which all our milk is anyway. This TB problem is something that seems to have reared its ugly head since FMD. I think the reason for this is that herds have been brought in from other parts of the country and have not got an immunit
y built up to it in this part of the country. That\rquote s sods law isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 52, 20/01/03
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
We get a phone call to say another farmer is shortly going to start back into milk after FMD. It seems a long time after but there\rquote s still more to come back yet we a
re told. As I am sitting writing this diary tonight, an old farmer friend who got FMD and then decided to retire, he\rquote 
d had enough, rang me up for a bit crack. We talked about how FMD had changed farming patterns and we both thought it was silly the way som
e of the farmers who had started back after FMD had increased their dairy herd sizes to what they used to be before FMD, considering the price that farmers were getting for their milk. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 53
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Since FMD there has been all sorts of schemes introduced to 
help farmers alter their farming practices, but alas some are not willing to alter their way of farming, they would rather carry on a road to no end. One would have thought after FMD they would have sat down and looked long and hard at the way farming has
 
been going but it does not sadly seem to be so. We also have the problem of some farmers who have started back after FMD and are now showing positive for TB. It is sad really when this part of the country has been reasonably free from TB for a number of y
ears as far as I know. One just wonders when will things get back to normal.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 Diary 54, 03/02/03
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid12528393 
Things are unusually quiet today but I do not mind as it give me time to reflect on the past and naturally my thoughts go back to FMD and the problems it has ca
used us. One way or another it has changed and how some of the farmers are producing for more milk than anyone could have thought possible after so many livestock were slaughtered. I do not think anyone though herds would be built up so quickly again.

\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Diary 57
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 
TB is becoming more and more to be found in herds, is this a follow on from FMD or an increase in badgers or maybe a combination of both. Once more it hits the farming industry and those connected with it, what a sad life. I hear of farmers d}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid8078572 y}{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 ing wit
h heart attacks all in a short time of each other, all farmers that I have been connected with over the years. Is it because of all the stress they have gone through with FMD and the extra rules and regulations? How much stress can the body take I wonder.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 Diary 64 14/04/03
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid12528393 I decided to go and rotovate my friend\rquote 
s vegetable plot for him. He is a farmer friend, one that was unfortunate to get FMD. He seems to be getting over it fairly well although his son keeps saying that even though we are up and running 
again, the fresh dairy herd bought in are not like my own cattle, and it is well over a year since they started back into production. It just shows that even though people keep saying look at all these farmers that got FMD and are now up and running again
, they don\rquote t know the half of what the farming community have gone through and are still going through.
\par }}