{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super 
\sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1333415\rsid1464770\rsid6889145\rsid9374501\rsid16537000\rsid16730696}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}
{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min54}{\version5}{\edmins5}{\nofpages28}{\nofwords6055}{\nofchars34515}{\*\company UKDA}{\nofcharsws40490}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot6889145 \fet0{\*\docvar {ACTIVE}{JBPM 44 (26 Feb 02).doc}}{\*\docvar {VTCASE}{4}}{\*\docvar {VTCommandPending}{NONE}}{\*\docvar {VTCurMacroFlags$}{NNNN}}{\*\docvar {VTINIT}{1}}
{\*\docvar {VTypeCAPFlag$}{TRUE}}{\*\docvar {VTypeJoinDigitFlag$}{FALSE}}{\*\docvar {VTypeLCFlag$}{FALSE}}{\*\docvar {VTypeNoSpaceFlag$}{TRUE}}{\*\docvar {VTypeSpaceFlag$}{FALSE}}{\*\docvar {VTypeUCFlag$}{FALSE}}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid16537000 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid6889145 Lancaster University}{\insrsid16537000 
\par Interview ID:  PM44}{\f1\insrsid16537000 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid16537000 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid16730696 9}}}{\cs17\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid16537000 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 Date of Interview: 26/02/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\ul\insrsid16537000 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid16537000 Date of birth: 1962
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 Occupation: Group 4}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid16537000 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid16537000 \chftn }{\insrsid16537000  }{\b\insrsid16537000 Group 1 }{\insrsid16537000 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid16537000 Group 2 }{\insrsid16537000 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid16537000 Group 3 }{\insrsid16537000 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid16537000 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid16537000 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid16537000 Group 5 }{\insrsid16537000 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid16537000 Group 6 }{\insrsid16537000 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid16537000 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b0\i\insrsid16537000 The interview took place at the respondent\rquote 
s home, a bungalow in a village which is much-visited by tourists during the holiday season. He lives alone. Although he is quite intense and thoughtful, he talked freely and was relaxed. At the beginning he asked me about the interview and how it would b
e used. I explained how I would leave the tape-recorder where he could switch it off and also said that if he would like to see a transcript of the interview I would send him one.
\par }{\insrsid16537000 
\par It\rquote s up to you, okay
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah, that\rquote 
ll be fine, I probably might be interested, I\rquote ll probably forget most of it
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par (Inaudible)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid16537000 Right so if we go back to a year ago, 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 
And just tell me a bit about what you were doing then, in your normal job, if you like
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Things kind of started slowly gr
inding to a halt, the bureaucratic process by which most government organisations, particularly the environment agency work, is quite astounding that they, they just put a stop on everything
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid16537000 What would you have been doing?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid16537000 Sampling, er, normally I er, sa
mple, monitoring, and inspect landfill sites (inaudible 006) throughout Cumbria er, which include going onto adjacent farmland, for surface water, ground water sampling, grass monitoring and so on, erm. So all, all sampling was just, er ceased, I was actu
a
lly out on the last day of sampling, and, with a colleague who covered a different area, erm, just out water sampling, and that was just (inaudible 010) discharged to the nearest available piece of land, erm . And then things really went quite quiet for a
, for a little while and then it just went kind of ballistic at the office, with being, well working in conjunction with, with then MAFF, erm, the whole thing was treated as a huge pollution incident if you like.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Right
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Er, that kind of response, so an inc
ident room was set up, and erm .... disinfectant kits for all field officers, so they could go to farms erm, and I kind of switched off.  I just, my reaction was, just thought this is absolute chaos, this is madness, people are just swimming against the, 
well yeah, just swimming against the tide here, and just jumping into the whole thing without any thought. So I, I firstly became quite detached and er, a, at that time of year it was, there was lots snow on the hills, and I\rquote 
d really got the ice climbing bug again last year, so I kind of, my immediate reaction was, resentment,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  That the hills were closed er, and the conditions really good down here, so, so I reacted, yeah I suppose on that level, and then, we were volunteered to work as gatekeepers for MAFF, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par By one of the team leaders\'85 originally it was..erm  Oh I can\rquote t remember how they did it off, off the top of my head but there, there was, within the three, no I was outwith the three k\rquote 
s on that, there was a five k zone, er and it was supposed to have environment agency operatives er were then field officers working, well working as field officers.  And they wouldn\rquote t actually, they\rquote 
d would just be licensing traffic and people on and off farms, well gatekeepers essentially, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Erm, and there was the other category with people would be working on farms.  doing the well, the just the whole, the whole shooting match as it were
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Actually acting as a field officer? What, for infected premises?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 They\rquote d be doing the whole thing, but I mean, I, I, I kind of drew back from that, thought well, I\rquote ll, I\rquote ll, I\rquote m prepared to do something \lquote cos I don\rquote 
t want to sit in the office, twiddling my thumbs.  Well,  I could have done a fair bit of work but it would have come to that and I thought I\rquote d much rather be outside, er doing something and so I kind of said well I\rquote ll go for, just patro
lling and, licensing people and tractors on and off, off farms. And then they, they sat round the table at area management team or whatever, erm and decided that nobody would actually work on the farms. }{\f0\insrsid16730696 
And, and this,  this process brewed for about a week where we went to meetings and \'93well how we going to deploy them?\'94 and the usual bureaucratic
 rubbish, and, and eventually, erm, I was, yes I went out to work on a farm but the reality of it was you got sort of, I think I mentioned this, }{\i\f0\insrsid16730696 (at the group meeting)}{\f0\insrsid16730696 
 you were, you were just doing everything, and I drove past the farm near Great Orton erm, called Sparrow Rigg which was the first farm I went on, erm, and we were involved with people and animals, and this is a farmer whose, all his stock was in the pr
ocess of being killed, his cattle have already been slaughtered, and I ended up with four other people, including the slaughterman rounding, rounding up black faced sheep, in a field and pen them. }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
Er, and there was a young Spanish vet, there, a young girl, and she was, she was in tears, erm, erm, her remit was to preserve and enhance life, and that kind of brought it all back, and that was just, it was a kind of surreal experience \lquote 
cos you could just quite casually drive around doing well, most other things and then you\rquote d go on a farm and there\rquote s an army officer and there\rquote 
s....it just seemed crazy, completely senseless..... erm..........yeah.......is there anything else, do you want to\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 How long did that go on for?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Er well, yeah, that was, I was only actua
lly out there for about a month, and, erm, that farm and another farm, which I was involved with,  working with the slaughter teams and, er well slaughtering the livestock and the, the whole process. And, in between that I was, I worked for a number of ot
h
er farms but it was, it was, that was where the stock had already been slaughtered, and it was just logistics problems and waiting for coal or sleepers and er, and moving stock that had been slaughtered in the fields.  And, just, just basically simple stu
ff, and, jetwashing vehicles on and off farms, and so on, erm and yeah the last, the last farm I was on was Houghton House Farm near Carlisle and it was a young vet who hadn\rquote t, hadn\rquote 
t worked on a farm before, well, not in the context of the, of the crisis, erm and I\rquote d a bit more experience than him so he really needed support and the slaughter team they were\'85 weren\rquote t\'85
 it was badly organised.  It was a dirty farm, er well I mean it was this time of year, well it was into March but you know wet, manure and slu
rry all over the place and it was just a mess and badly organised, erm, and that was the last one I did.  erm, I just thought oh well, I, I questioned my own sanity and motives for doing it and at the time it was, well it was, it was just a case of action
 rather than thinking, I could have walked out at any time, erm and I suppose just, I felt that, these people were doing a job \lquote 
cos they believed it was the right thing to do and they needed support from another human being and I was, another  human being in that situation. So I suppose that\rquote 
s why, why I did it.  But er, the consequences of that took er, a good few months to come, come to terms with, and like some of the people thought at the meeting er, that what was the girl, Christine, that she didn\rquote t wan
t to be with people or, that she couldn\rquote 
t speak to people, and I found, I found very much the same, erm.. Most of my friends are still north of the border and er, I just jumped in my van and took off, took off north and visit some friends in Glasgow. I just didn\rquote 
t want to be with them, it was nice to see them, and I was looking for something that only, that only people with shared, well like any, any, any shared experience or any experience, you can only appreciate it through having experienced something similar

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  And I think for a long time I was looking for that kind of support,  rather than going back into the office and, people coming to you saying, well you know I\rquote m a vegetarian, that\rquote s sounds a bit hard, I\rquote 
m pretty much vegetarian myself but you know, erm, and it\rquote s terrible and all that, but without really having a, a clue of, of what it was like.... erm.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 So you didn\rquote t feel you got support at work?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes,  on a level of people working out in the field, er, I, I, other field officers and some of my
 colleagues which is just kind of well, you had your phone with you all the time so you, you phoned a, you phoned a friend or, or you know, \'93what are you doing today?\'94 and, you know, \'93what are you up to your eyeballs in?\'94
  So there was support on that level but the environment agency, dealt with it very badly in that, erm, once you\rquote ve been on a, an infected premise you were classed as a dirty worker, and, and you weren\rquote 
t allowed to come to the office for a five day period thereafter.  So you really did feel like a, a, a, I\rquote ve never had leprosy but you know
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par You know, that kind of situation, you felt like in way slightly paranoid er because, er, I mean you\rquote d finish work and then go on a supermarket or buy some food \lquote cos it was night and you couldn\rquote 
t go anywhere else and that was quite acceptable, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par You know er, and, yeah, it was, it was pretty strange really,.... So I did kind of, I resented myself.  And I resented, er the government and the fact that, erm, the only way I could comfortably res
olve the situation was to er, leave my job and, well prior to working here at, I\rquote 
d been in education, got a degree and struggled to get any work. So it was like, on the horns of a dilemma, do I stick with my principles and tell them to stuff it or, do I, r
emain seduced by the, the weekly pay, well the monthly, the monthly pay cheque you know? Erm...and I suppose it\rquote s an issue that for me will always be there on a certain level, with any employer, that\rquote s just me\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, what did you do after (inaudible ) when you had these feelings?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Erm, in terms of work, or?  Well I went back into the office and the incident was, well as I said, basically a nerve centre for }{\f0\insrsid16730696 liaising}{\f0\insrsid16537000 
 between er, with MAFF for, for granting authorisation for, storage lagoons and, basically any activity on a farm or\'85 I just like get on to MAFF and it\rquote s simple things like, well, like 
\par \'93there\rquote s a, there\rquote s a farmer here who\rquote s had two hundred and fifty cattle that\rquote ve been rotting in a field for a week, do something now, you\rquote re going to cause a pollution incident, \lquote 
cos you know, decomposing matter is leaching into the waterworks\'94.
\par  Erm, so I felt that was, erm, I felt quite good about that \lquote cos I actually learnt quite a lot, just in dealing with people, telephone, er, er and colleagues as well, \lquote cos th
ere was people from all departments that were working. It was mainly environment protection so I got to know a lot of people that I hadn\rquote t really had anything to do with before, er, and it broke down the, it broke down the barriers of status
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  Which was good you know.... So I, I found that quite, quite beneficial in that, and my colleagues kind of appreciated me in a sense that, that I\rquote 
d actually been out an, done the dirty end of it, an, there, I mean that was, there was as much pressure on there on a different level, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Er, it was working twelve hour days, seven days a week, for a, for a number of months, er, I, I didn\rquote t, I didn\rquote t do many seven day stints, but , erm, but it was manned seven days a week so there was, there was a lot of pressure on
, on er, and just literally you know, farmers, crying down the telephone er, and well, you have to be sensitive and I felt I could be  a bit more sincere than, erm, where colleagues who hadn\rquote 
t been out working in the field, there, well it got to them in the end, that, ................
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 That must have been difficult, listening and not being able to do anything directly or did you feel that you could help?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 In a way it\rquote s like, I could appreciate it because\'85 well I suppose anybody within Cumbria really could appreciate, unless you were, if you didn\rquote t have any senses at all, er...I don\rquote 
t know, I, I, I think on a, on a level I could offer some sympathy but it was... you were quite distant from them.  That was it, you weren\rquote t, you weren\rquote t the person on the farm wi
th two hundred and fifty odd of cattle and you know, and a little cow \lquote cos you could come back to your comfortable abode and, and shut it out to a certain extent..... erm............
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Did it affect your life outside work? I mean we talked about not being able to go out on the fells,
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  Was that a frustration, not having that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Just went to Scotland every, most weekends, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Erm, ......it was kind of a frustration but it was like, I, I\rquote ve only, I\rquote ve been living down here two years and I\rquote 
m still looking towards working back north again, and at that time it was just, it was just escape personally, you could go up to the Highlands and, I mean there was restrictions, disinfectant and so forth round places, you could  just shut it all out....
 er
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 It must have affected this village quite a lot, because this village will have a lot of tourism..
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh yeah, I mean for me on a very selfish point of view, I, I enjoyed that, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Erm, like, last March you could cycle along to Patterdale and you'd see 
more bicycles than cars on the road, it was like turning the clock back fifty years kind of thing. No, on a selfish level I, I quite enjoyed that, I mean the restriction of the fells but erm, yes I mean, obviously people lost out business wise but, there 
again I\rquote ve got some, got some pretty radical views on, erm, selling your landscape\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  For, for a means for a living, erm, it\rquote s people\rquote s free choice what they want to do for a living but er, ...So...Yeah, I quite enjoyed that aspect of it, I mean it\rquote s, if I continue to live around, it\rquote 
s a nice place, Pooley Bridge, lakes, mountains and so on,  but it\rquote s a living hell here in the summer, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, (laughs)
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Er, so I don\rquote t intend to spend the summer here. So from that point of view it was rather pleasant, but a
fter Easter people did start coming back, erm, when the restrictions were lifted and eventually, well, no actually the restrictions were still on until, until June, started selectively opening the areas 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par But, erm, yeah. I mean talking to local people in the shop I mean, they lost out on a lot of money (inaudible 147).  Innkeepers as well, but er, but I can\rquote 
t honestly say I noticed a huge difference between, the previous year, in terms of numbers of people...yeah...Does that answer your question?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, interesting, because, just because its one of those villages that you hear about in tourism..(inaudible 152) whether you were aware of other people complaining about the lack of tourists
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah, well, not, not, not specifically, but, well yes I suppose specifically the people in the shop, I mean, they, they, they lost a lot of money, (inaudible 154) revenue yeah.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 So the last case was during September, 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Had things got back to normal for you before that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Pretty much, erm...I\rquote 
m trying to think in terms of time, it was, end of July...yes it would be July when I started going out, on sites again, No probably June. There was some selected areas that you could, well some landfills, you know you don\rquote 
t have to go on and (?) them up for samples and so on, erm.  It took quite a, it\rquote s only really been in the past, well this month, that things have got back to normal after the, declaration of disease free status. The agency\rquote 
s gone very much with the softly softly approach, erm, then in, I mean even though there\rquote 
s blood testing do have now, do have disease free status again. Er, contacting farmers, landowners you know, issues. Even though we have powers and rights to, to go on land. So, so it\rquote s only really this month that some of them\rquote 
ve got back to full swing again, and I was actually on a farm today. It was, a farmer I was trying to get in touch with, for the past week, and hadn\rquote t, and he wasn\rquote t there, and I said well, I was doing some sampling on a 
landfill site, surface water and he\rquote s, directly discharging into, into a couple of becks, and, and then into the river Eden, and I thought I\rquote 
ll just go on the, on the farm and do it. But I was very conscious, and I was, although it was kind of strange again, bringing it back, it was, it\rquote s one of the few farms I\rquote 
ve been on, erm, since the foot and mouth with livestock. And I just kind of thought well the last time I went on a farm in this kind of situation it was to slaughter all the livestock, you know, just .. yeah... just a bit strange.............
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Do you still, do you actually feel as if you get flashbacks 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh yes
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par of the work you did on the farms?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh, well yeah, vivid images,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  I mean I\rquote ll never be able to look at a cow or a sheep again without seeing blood pouring out of the hole in its head, you know, erm, maybe I will in time
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  But I mean, I, I, on a certain level I don\rquote t think there\rquote s anything wrong with that, I mean...I still use animal products, as I say, I\rquote m not a hundred percent vegetarian, but I do use meat, erm, and I think, I think it\rquote 
s probably quite beneficial in a way, to see that kind of thing. I think most people, should, should go and visit a slaughterhouse and this is, from beginning to end, this is the process that, whereby you buy it from a butcher and gets on your plate... It
\rquote s just a personal philosophy if you, for me, if you\rquote d be prepared to take responsibility for taking out, taking a life, I mean, I used to shoot and I used to do fishing and so, I have done, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par and shot for the pot and so, erm, I think people would er, you know change their mind, can only..........
\par (pause in tape, respondent answers telephone)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 A bit about the flashbacks.. are you aware of it having any other effects on your health.. Did it affect your sleeping or your eating, drinking?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Well, I drank a lot, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Did you?
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par and I was smoking at that time, I\rquote ve been an on and off smoker for years, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Erm, and yes lots of people smoked. People who hadn\rquote t smoked for years, er, were reaching for a cigarette... and, I was drinking fairly heavily as well. It\rquote 
s an effective way to numb the senses, er, not drinking excessively but, yeah, drinking just a little, numb your senses, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par So it\rquote s... well it\rquote s fair to blame that because I, I, as I said earlier I\rquote d got back into climbing again and er, well it\rquote s portrayed er I suppose, in some ways as a healthy kind of lifestyle, and I\rquote ve always, I\rquote 
ve always smoked when I\rquote ve climbed, 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Yeah}{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1333415 Er, you know come on, }{\f0\insrsid16537000 have a couple of beers, an a couple of drags and so on, so that\rquote s probably is as much to blame for my personal habits as the foot and mouth but it certainly exacerbated the, you know

\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Climbing can also be seen as a kind of er, I don\rquote t know how to describe it, a careless, ...lifestyle (inaudible 201)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Looking for oblivion, I don\rquote t know, do you know what I mean?
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah, no, I went through that stage with motorbikes, throughout my twenties, had plenty of opportunities to confront my destiny hitting cars and other things, and I kind of, I\rquote ve always felt my guardian, my guardian angel
\rquote s been pretty good to me, erm, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par and it\rquote s something I still believe that I won\rquote t er, I won\rquote t choose to die a violent death, but yes I mean, I
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Climbing has that on-the-edge quality
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 It does aye, I mean, yes, erm, you go out, you\rquote re looking for an adrenaline hit, it\rquote s just another addiction really, Like pretty much a lot of things we do in life, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Erm and it was escapism, I mean, as I said, escaping to Scotland for, for weekends, go out and go pursue some ice somewhere... so yeah just pure escapism...
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 So that was something that really helped in a way, if you hadn\rquote t had that, you\rquote d have got more ground down?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 I, I don\rquote t know, I just, I just didn\rquote t feel comfortable being here, mainly because it was just a stinking place, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Erm pretty much the whole of the Eden valley, well it was,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 There was a big pyre up the road wasn\rquote t there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 At Sockbridge three miles down the road. Fortunately, the er, the wind was blowing in the opposite direction, if it had been blowing in this direction I would have just, well I would have just gone to Scotl
and and er, and I probably would have packed up my job if that had been the case (inaudible 217) Erm \lquote cos yeah that was, that was, well er the whole thing was ridiculous ...er I mean 
\par \'93Clean air act? Never heard of it\'94. 
\par This is a crisis situation er the legislation disappeared out the window, erm, to a, to a large extent, but. So, yeah, going back to what you\rquote re asking it was just, it was just escapism, I just couldn\rquote 
t stand being here. It was okay once, once the pyres had finished and er, and all the carc
asses, the backlog of the carcasses had been cleared, er, the, it was, it was fine then, but.. I was still kind of caught up in the obsession of, of climbing last year, so, just get away every er available opportunity, (inaudible 225) by that time, so in 
March and April, end of March and end of April I wouldn\rquote t, well even into May in fact \lquote cos it was a long winter. Er, I wouldn\rquote t say it was particularly escapism, from foot and mouth, just escapism yeah..(inaudible 228)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah, was there anything that did help particularly...to calm down?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 No, just time really, I mean just accepting that I\rquote d made choices which I\rquote 
d felt incredibly guilty about, and my own, you know the battle that was going on in my mind, just if I wanted, as I said before erm, I felt I needed to help people who were doing something that they hadn\rquote 
t really clearly thought about. I suppose I was a bit confused by my own emotions at the time \lquote 
cos I thought I had thought about it, if, if you see what I mean.  Erm, but yeah, just, basic human need compelled me to do it, some basic human need or maybe I was, on a, on a subconscious level it was something
 I actually needed to experience, erm, and, and learn from it.  I just felt a huge amount of resentment, and er, and that\rquote s started to wane now, because I\rquote 
m much more focused about, about what it is. But just er, the political angle, the subterfuge, the li
es, the deceit. Erm  I remember a historian I had at er, a college in, in the eighties, in, in Glasgow, before I took up full time further education again, made the point that, any, any government in office, their main ambition is to remain in office, and
 that\rquote s, that\rquote s kind of stuck with me. It\rquote 
s like yes okay, appease the masses, work in tandem with your business community, the people with huge amounts of money, the, the multinational companies that run the western so, er, and, and, put on a, put on a nic
e face or as nice a face as you possibly can, without screaming population to death, as it were.  So from that point of view very, very bitter,  .......erm..from the political angle. I mean I, I vividly remember, the last farm I was on, I was thinking, I 
was penning up cattle and, I would have been quite happy to have seen Blair and his cabinet getting penned up and getting popped in the head you know. It was kind of, I don\rquote t know about debasing but I mean, I\rquote 
ve seen all the footage, well pretty much most of that and the holocaust, and stuff like that and it\rquote s the same dimension. It\rquote 
s like one, once you go to a certain level I, I reckon, for, for me personally I could have actually killed people, erm, which I don\rquote t think was a very healthy state of mind to be in, but...erm, that\rquote 
s how I felt er, at that time, er I mean I\rquote d like to have seen Blair and his cabinet, popped in the head....
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 That\rquote s really (inaudible 258) have others felt like that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Erm, I don\rquote t know
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 The political dimension
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 The political, yes, erm, but I haven\rquote t, I haven\rquote t heard too many people voice their opinions on it.  I mean obviously I\rquote ve heard the rumours and er, of the conspiracy theory which are, I don\rquote t think it
\rquote s a theory at all, I think it\rquote s just badly managed by the politicians, erm, and, and, and it backfired on them quite badly.... in terms of reimbursing farmers.  I\rquote 
m hoping that they will now go and do something else, and give up farming \lquote cos, well don\rquote t really need all this livestock. Erm, I still, I still very much believe that. And I\rquote ve had, well, dealings on other political levels er\'85
 while I was in the highlands, there was lack of consultation for the Cairngorm funicular, which personally, the thing itself it looks fine, I don\rquote t mind it, but it was just the, the process the la
ck of public enquiry, the lack of erm, alternatives, er the consultation process it was just ridden over roughshod because Highland council, along with the local community wanted it for their business like.  So it went ahead, and I, I, I just on that leve
l I feel quite resentful but, again we all have a vote and we should use it, well it might make a difference one day, erm, and a lot of the farmers as well I think... I feel that, I suppose it\rquote 
s easy for me to say, but if, if more of them had stood there with shotguns and said no you, your not getting anywhere on my farm, I\rquote ll, you know, I\rquote ll, I\rquote ll shoot you, it wouldn\rquote 
t have happened ... Erm, maybe it would, maybe, maybe Blair would\rquote ve drafted in the army on a very real level, to, to clear it up.  Erm, I don\rquote t, I honestly, I, I, just don\rquote 
t know, but erm, I feel that if farmers had stood up for their beliefs, not all of them do believe in vaccination, you know, some of them were quite happy that it, it was the way to go er. But I think they could have. I thin
k they could have stood against it on a more unified level, \lquote cos I think, well, just the whole of the farming community, most farmers know most of the farmers, well within a, within a localised area...
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 May be that was the problem though, people didn\rquote t want to feel that they might bring down their neighbours?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh yeah,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 (inaudible 289)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 and I think just the, the philosophy that was put across on a government level that, you know we should kill it dead and burn it, erm, it\rquote ll go away\'85 okay it did eventually,
 erm, I think a lot of the farmers were just, brainwashed by that idea, and, the political level was kind of
\par  \'93Dumb farmers will, will do what they think is right if we, if we sell it, in a hard, hard way to them.\'94...
\par Like you can talk round in circles about all this..the issues ...... yeah yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Did you feel that you had all the information that you needed, I mean did you get asking you questions when you were out in the field?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Not particularly.  Erm, I mean, when I was going to farms to see if they neede
d assistance er, I mean basically the system was, that, erm MAFF would report back to our incident room to a liaison officer who was liasing with staff of a hundred or so, or more in fact, throughout Cumbria, er and they\rquote 
d give you a grid reference, and a contact number of the MAFF vet, or a, a, an army officer, or may be just the farm. And so then was the only times we was asked questions. We\rquote 
d get a phone number and go to the farm and try to contact them but more often than not er, the ones that I went to er, I wasn\rquote t needed \lquote 
cos the stock had been slaughtered, and everything under control.  But er, on a general level er.... No I mean people didn\rquote t ask questions about, well about the things we\rquote ve been talking about, how it affected you, people really didn\rquote 
t find a way, quite shy really about it,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  Er, I suppose on a similar level the way, the way most people,  again I\rquote m generalising, deal with death of friends and relatives in the country, like, it\rquote s not talked about, and it was very much that kind of approach, just block it out it
\rquote s not really there.  Well it is actually, just walk out your door, you know...I suppose it\rquote s a mechanism people use to, to deal with things, to actually don\rquote t deal with it, but er, that\rquote s peoples free choice I mean (inaudible 
319) themselves, but er... again personally....
\par 
\par }\pard \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Maybe people were worried about what they would uncover?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh, I think so, I think that if you go round with a blinkered attitude to life, that you only see gloom, well you might, er, yes that\rquote s true, I suppose
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Did good things come out of it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 I can\rquote t say that I\rquote ve really seen anything, I mean the, the philosophy that er, farming would become more small, more small scale and localised and... More accountable, so people could, buy local produce,
 having said that, that does happen in Cumbria, I mean, there\rquote s a lot of farmers\rquote  markets, and it is, kind of going back to grassroots level which is nice to see, erm, I don\rquote t think that\rquote 
s really a reflection of foot and mouth, I think it\rquote s just a reflection of people, being aware they can get good home produce, prod..food, er good quality stuff and are prepared to buy it, and yeah, er, I think that\rquote 
s fine...............are we talking about personal benefits here or benefits for Cumbria or, or,..?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Anything 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Right
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par I\rquote m just wondering whether you feel there was anything positive as a result of it all
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, I mean, I\rquote ve, I\rquote ve learnt a lot, I mean in terms of responsibility and as I said cutting across the status barriers, er between well managers of various disciplines.  And I\rquote 
ve always pretty much held that, you know, the Robbie Burns, \'93A man\rquote s a man for all that\'94 er, but it did kind of break down barriers and, and whereas before it was just er, kind of the humble protection assistant, a man who regardless of
 educational background goes out, fills bottles and inspects a few sites, it kind of did, er, did cut through that,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  So I felt again, I suppose more respect and recognition from colleagues
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Do you think those changes in perception will last?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 No, no,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Oh
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  Er, in some cases yes, people that I\rquote m with, I struck up friendships with, people that are, are just colleagues from another department, no, it\rquote s just sort of like it\rquote s something that\rquote s ............ never happened
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 I was going to ask whether you\rquote d feel it would make\'85 change work practices or the way teams work
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 I don\rquote t, I don\rquote t think so, I think in terms of the function I work for the environment protection everybody coped well........on a very well, on a practical, coped with it very well, went o
ut out their way to work long hours, to respond to the crisis situation.  Erm, and as I said personally I actually learnt lot, and er, people and, and my colleagues, so it was a good learning experience, and in terms of selling myself   as an employee,  w
ell it\rquote s something they\rquote ve got to put on your CV or  application form, \'93crisis management in foot and mouth\'94, erm, so yeah that is a benefit, definitely a benefit.......
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 In a way did it give, give you more confidence, or did it just give you the opportunity to use what you had anyway?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Bit of both, a bit of both aye......it certainly, through dealing with colleagues  that that weren\rquote t particularly interested in your opinion about things prior to that, and, and in terms of the fact that you did have practica
l work experience of getting covered in blood and shit and the whole, whole gambit, it\rquote s like well, you can always fire that back at them if they were trying to spin you something in a direction that  that wasn\rquote t, wasn\rquote 
t the truth.  Aye, and yes we may have gone out (inaudible 372) probably not..............no........I\rquote 
m not just a fella that can go (inaudible 374) me being a better person an, than them or anyone else, but, you know, I suppose in this (inaudible 375)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 That\rquote s right
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah........
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 So where do you think you\rquote ll go from here, will you be, you\rquote ve indicated\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 In life, or
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 You\rquote ve indicated that at the meeting and today it has if not changed you, its marked you, in the way that you... like you say  you don\rquote t just leave it behind
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 It\rquote s, it\rquote s actually given me a great deal of focus, just coming to the meeting the other week.  and er, and my parents that live in Glengarry, they came down for the weekend, and er, I\rquote 
ve had a fairly nomadic childhood, mainly because my mother hasn\rquote t been a particularly happy individual, erm, from all the emotional baggage she\rquote s carried from her childhood for er, sixty five years, er, and the way she\rquote 
s dealt with that is, keep moving, every two or three years and like they\rquote re 76 now they\rquote re too old for it, they came down for the weekend and said, \'93oh we\rquote re looking at some houses\'94, and just threw this on me out of the blue, 
\'93we\rquote ve got some details from the estate agents\'94,  and I thought \'93you\rquote re absolutely crazy, you\rquote re not going to do this\'94 . And certainly my childhood, my mother was, well my mother\rquote 
s always been a bit of a control freak, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Er, just part of her character, her makeup, er and I though okay, this is, this is the game you want to play it\rquote s like, my father\rquote s probably going to die before, well certainly going to die before she is, she can\rquote t drive so she
\rquote s, she\rquote s trying to play the game by her rules. , and for reasons I won\rquote t dwell on, it brought up the foot and mouth, the meeting, the whole thing. These issues from childhood, er which I can now address. So, been beneficial, it
\rquote s like I\rquote ve got the address of a couple of healers, I need to do some release work and get rid of this, this emotional baggage that I\rquote ve, I\rquote ve been carrying, a, a a lot of my life. Er, it\rquote 
s given me the focus that I can now do that, er, well in (inaudible 402) up to me but (inaudible) help and guidance from (inaudible) individual.  So it has been beneficial, I don\rquote t think you do anything in life that\rquote s not beneficial,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 You think it\rquote s how you use it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, I think you know, if we used our brains on a full level of ..(inaudible 406). a hundred percent cross over between our conscious and subconscious mind we\rquote 
d be incredibly focussed and, ...precise, loving, giving, individuals, erm....so yes I would say it has been of benefit, I mean, when I initially spoke to,..oh I can\rquote t remember her name now, the, the
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Irene, who was recruiting?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Irene, yeah, who organised that, and I thought well what, what can I get out of this? I thought well look maybe I can vent my anger and resentment that, so I was, suppose that I was aware that that hadn\rquote 
t gone away, and started talking about the issues yeah, I mean, I think, I think it\rquote ll be beneficial, in terms of the diary, I haven\rquote t written anything yet but
 erm, ..(Big sigh)............................I, I think yes, I can, well I was up in the hills Saturday skiing, erm, fell blizzardish conditions.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par  Er, few miles up the road towards Helvellyn way and I came back down, it Glencoyne and taking my skis off huddled behind a wall, and I was aware that there was four things that weren\rquote t, that weren\rquote 
t rocks, they were sheep.  They were pretty much covered in snow, and, and I don\rquote t particularly like sheep as creatures I\rquote ve worked on a farm as a kid, erm but  q
uite like black faced sheep and herdwick, quite nice beasts to look at, and I had sandwiches left and I just broke them up and threw them on the snow, I wouldn\rquote 
t have done that a year ago..........I think from that point of view I was looking like, okay I can come off the hill, er jump in a car and go back to my warm house, you\rquote ve got to, you\rquote ve got to live here, you don\rquote 
t do it out of choice, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par Well maybe you do, I\rquote m not a sheep I can\rquote t think like a sheep, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah (laughs)
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par But, I wouldn\rquote t have done that a year ago. I think on a, a broader level the, the whole thing pointed me, pointed out to me that,  just, well something I\rquote 
ve always known but, just how incredibly responsible we are as guardians of this planet and, and what we choose to domesticate an, and care for an, and use, or abuse, erm so it kind of, kind of felt that (inaudible 443)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 It\rquote s interesting \lquote cos you, I would assume your work, there was that in your character as well, that you were monitoring 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par fields, and what we\rquote re doing to them
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, well to a, yes to a certain extent yes, aha, yes and I mean again, it was just like er, well Great Orton that was just crazy, they did very little with, with containing it, the fact that they\rquote 
d rather drive for time but there\rquote s a legacy for the next fifty years, I still go and sample there, erm, just crazy...................I just can\rquote t say, its huge
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Do you think there\rquote ll be long term problems?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Erm, I, I think, as I said they\rquote ve been lucky and it\rquote s contained now, erm all the,  all the trenches, er where the stock were buried, its contained within a, a ventonite (?) wall which is thirty metres deep so I haven
\rquote t, I\rquote ve never seen any geological survey maps well actually, we don\rquote t have any at er, at Kilmarnock, at the office, I would imagine geologists have been consulted, that they\rquote 
ve got it right, that the er, the walls are sufficient depth and that, that the base layer of, well its obviously sandstone and layers of alluvium, whatever the base layer is, is impermeable, impermeable enough to contain any
 downward migration, er, but again there\rquote 
s a legacy for the next fifty years, er. I mean, the leachates from the trenches, er, which I still sample, on a monthly basis, I do groundwater sampling there, so I look at the boreholes er, all over the site. And 
er, we used to take a leachate sample weekly, from the, from the actually the leachate in the trenches, and that was just being, quite public knowledge that they\rquote 
d been discharged, erm to the Irish Sea, providing once it was treated, er beforehand but er
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Was it taken away in tankers?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yes, I, I\rquote m not sure who\rquote s got the contract, but somebody\rquote s got the contract for er, well for treating it offsite and discharging it...mm.......a lot of people made a lot a lot of money out of it...........

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Is it people like the environment agency that had to contract those people to do it or is it some...
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 No, no it\rquote s er, it\rquote s actually, it\rquote s MAFF, well DEFRA\rquote s responsiblity, I guess the environment agency will licence their action and so on in terms of consent of discharge , so it\rquote 
s no, not of detriment to the aquatic environment and so er, but it\rquote s DEFRA\rquote s responsiblity.......................
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Is there anything else that we haven\rquote t talked about?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 I think we\rquote ve pretty much covered it,........most of my feelings are there I think........ erm yes I think I did get to a point where I was really quite low, my, my fiance she, she\rquote 
s been living in Belize since, (inaudible 500) well coming up a year now er, er so we have a fairly distant relationship at the moment
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 So you didn\rquote t have that emotional support?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 And I was, I was, I was just, just exacerbating a lot of things in my life, and I, I said about the Catch 22 situation that I felt had created within work (inaudible 505) my job, and, I walked, walking along the p
ier one night and I suppose that was the ultimate low point and I did actually think about jumping in, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Did you?
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par And then I thought well, no I don\rquote t need a swim, (laughter)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 You felt that bad?
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par you know, but I thought like, I felt so bad about myself, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 About yourself?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 About myself..............yeah, I did actually, yeah I did actually feel like dying....as I say I didn\rquote t do it, but that, part of my minds relatively rational that er, I\rquote ve couldn\rquote t do that...
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 That was a sort of guilty feeling}{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par It was, yeah, I mean, I\rquote ve never really thought like that in my life before, so, yeah, it was just the jump of supporting a situation that, I didn\rquote 
t support, that whatever leading me or blindness I went along with it, and contributed, so it was basically, just massive guilt on that level that, I, I\rquote 
d taken part in the historic, well permanently destroying part of farmers livelihoods and er, supporting the government which I didn\rquote t support er still don\rquote t support
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 What helped you through, apart from thinking you\rquote d swim?... 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 My just\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Sanity
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 My own degree of sanity that was still left, yeah, erm, I think that was about...
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 Were you able to talk to your fiance about it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Yeah, I mean she\rquote s er................
\par 
\par (tape turned over).....
\par 
\par well I wasn\rquote t, I wasn\rquote t really looking for support \lquote cos I just trying, justify my own, feelings of guilt of the whole, myriad of stuff going round in my head at, at the time, to myself, and, yeah
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 As you\rquote ve said before, it\rquote s hard to explain that, or to talk about it to somebody that hasn\rquote t actually shared the experience
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Well, I don\rquote t think it\rquote s hard to talk about it, but for, for them to, it\rquote 
s like, you know yourself, any, anything in life, you can only understand it by having some experience of it, otherwise you, you can sympathise and so on but you\rquote 
ll, well to my mind you might be paying lip service to, to the, to the person, describing whatever they\rquote ve been through erm........ yeah spoken to her
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par When\rquote s she coming back?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 Er I\rquote m going out there in April, and erm, well just for a couple of weeks, so we, we haven\rquote 
t decided, er, on a country to live in yet she kind of likes, warm climes, and is drawn to Greece, Nepal and India, but er, I would happily settle in Scotland. , er, having said that in Cumbria, I\rquote ve live down here quite a lo
t in the lakes, again it (inaudible 540) dependant on (inaudible 540) or both of us, doing something that\rquote ll satisfy both our needs
\par 
\par Yes
\par 
\par , like plenty of potential there}{\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par }\pard \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par }{\f0\insrsid16537000 
\par }}