{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{
\s4\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{
\s5\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 5;}{
\s6\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 6;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 Body Text;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 
Body Text 2;}{\s18\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text 3;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 footer;}{\*\cs20 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{
\s23\ql \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\cf1\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext23 Normal (Web);}{\*\cs24 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}}
{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2116861\rsid4791720\rsid5072385\rsid8207490\rsid8730315\rsid9131032\rsid10105678\rsid10423486\rsid11752868\rsid13315664\rsid13373179\rsid13596952\rsid14221568\rsid16343758\rsid16534086}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min30}{\version12}{\edmins9}{\nofpages26}{\nofwords11525}{\nofchars65693}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws77064}{\vern16391}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1797\margr1797 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot4791720 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid14221568 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14221568 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14221568 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid14221568 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid4791720 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria \tab \tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\fs20\insrsid13373179 Lancaster University}{\fs20\insrsid4791720 
\par Diary ID:       PM09}{\insrsid4791720                                        
\par 
\par 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs20\insrsid4791720 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs20\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid16534086 5}}}{\cs20\insrsid4791720 
\par }\pard \s19\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid4791720 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid4791720 Information about diarist
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Date of birth: 1981
\par Gender: F
\par Occupation: Group 5}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs22\super\insrsid4791720 \chftn }{\insrsid4791720  }{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Group 1 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid4791720 

\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }{\insrsid4791720 
\par }{\i\fs24\insrsid4791720\charrsid13373179 Paper diary has lots of newspaper cuttings and other related material.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\cf6\insrsid4791720 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 25}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  February 2002
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 After the snow, which fell at the weekend, melted combined with the additional rainfall, many of the fields surrounding the village, as well
 as the roads, were flooded.  Usually this wouldn't concern you much, however, with the burial site being so close and the number of underground streams in the area, it does become worrying.  There isn't any guarantee that groundwater in the surrounding a
rea won't become effected and to what extent.  There seem to be a number of aspects to me concerning this issue which remain unclear.  For example, what exactly can be carried in water and how might this effect people in the area? ; }{
\fs24\insrsid16534086 What}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  is being tested for in the surrounding streams}{\fs24\insrsid16534086 ?}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 what exactly is classed as a danger?; and if problems did arise, how would they be monitored and resolved.  All these issues do tend to make you anxious.
\par In particular on Monday, when I was out walking my dog}{\fs24\insrsid9131032  }{\fs24\insrsid4791720  I noticed a coup
le of drains which I passed looked as if they were blocked and there was a lot of water around.  It just makes you wonder how much has come possibly from the burial site and if it is actually safe.
\par My worries on Monday about the groundwater were even more 
emphasised by the statement I heard on the Border News on Tuesday, by the Environment Agency.  This statement was concerning the future safety of the groundwater in the area around the burial site.  The Agency could give no guarantee that the groundwater 
w
ould not become affected in the future.  Since then I have heard no further news about the issue.  There may be more information on news reports I missed. In my opinion not enough information is given to the public about these issues.  Results of testing 
b
y the Environment Agency are meant to be available to the public, however, I have never heard much about the details.  I think more effort should be made to inform, in particular, resident near burial sites as these issues are bound to be important to the
m.
\par After hearing the news, I did become more worried but at the end of the day there is little we can really do ourselves.  You find yourself having to trust people or agencies you know little about and just hoping everything will be alright.
\par On Tuesday, also noticed a horrible smell outside, so did my }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 , but again you can't be sure exactly where this is coming from or what is causing it?
\par 
\par On Thursday, with news of possible Foot and Mouth case further south near Leeds, I became very worried that this wh
ole thing was going to start all over again!  My worries were about the farmers and people involved and how they would be affected; if other cases could be identified and in particular, affecting my own life, if animals would have to be slaughtered again 
i
n the future, where would they be disposed of? Would existing burial sites be reopened as opposed to finding suitable sites for new burial sites.  It would seem easier to reopen burial sites but what would this mean for the future and to what extent would
 the health risks be increased?
\par I was very relieved to hear the testing of the foot and mouth cases came back negative.  I was relieved for the people involved, and also residents near burial sites.  However, this did raise questions in my mind of how this 
sort of situation would be handled in the future and what consequences it might have? 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 2 \endash  4}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 On Monday passed driving test and now }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and myself are insured on a small car.  This opens up so many opportunities and we have a huge sense of 
freedom.  Last summer we had planned to go on a camping holiday with our dog }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
.  We had al our equipment prepared but were unable to go due to the foot and mouth outbreak.  Neither of us imagined how long and widespread the outbreak would be And Though
t at first it would be over in a few weeks.  Now a year later we are able to replan our holiday.  This is exciting as we have waited so long.  It is unbelievable to think how long it has taken for restrictions on the countryside to return to as normal as 
can be possible, due to the circumstances.  For the actual people directly involved in the foot and mouth crisis this must have seemed like far longer!
\par On Tuesday I had a lovely surprise when I noticed the lambs in a field near my house when out walking my 
dog.  It was lovely to see and for a few minutes things almost seemed normal again.  Even though the burial site is only about a mile away, it is hidden from view from the village, you never forget though as soon as you spot the windmills and remember the
 repeated pictures featured in the news.
\par Seeing the lambs really did lift my spirits and the future after foot and }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 mouth didn\rquote t}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  seem as bad as  thought the week before.
\par I can\rquote t recall the exact days but they were towards the beginning of the week.  On two particular occasions my fiance and I noticed a terrible smell outside.  We aren\rquote t sure exactly what the smell was, just that it was very unpleasant!

\par The only other incident which I can recall which stands out in my mind this past week is a conversation I had with my }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9\rquote s Granddad}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 .  We were talking about how bad last year\rquote 
s Foot and Mouth outbreak had been and he recalled the outbreak of 1967.  He commented on how he thought that outbreak had been far better controlled.  It was better as the animals wer
e killed and buried on the actual farms in lime.  There was no transporting dead or live animals like last year.  He also commented on the fact that there were no pyres then and that he hadn\rquote 
t thought it a good idea last year.  Overall he thought that last year\rquote s outbreak could have been dealt with better and that }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 action}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  was taken far too late to prevent the disease spreading.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 3 \endash  11}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 One new thing I have noticed this week is the amount of birds there are flying around, especially black crows.  I think it is because I have been driving and }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 every time}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 I drive past the fields at the south end of the village, there are large amounts of crows hustled together. Can never remember it being quite like that last summer.  It makes you wonder why so many ar
e drawn to just those fields.  As I drive past in the next few weeks I will see if it is still the same.
\par On about occasions this week }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I have noticed a slight smell outside again.  Not as  foul smelling but still noticeable.
\par On Tuesday, saw new s
eries featured on ITV called Rural Lives.  I think this is a good idea as the issue of foot and mouth is still very painful to a lot of people and is not over yet.  The effects are still happening however, on the news and in other media, it isn\rquote 
t often mentioned and doesn\rquote t get the attention it deserves.
\par Hopefully through programmes like this people will get a better understanding of the issues involved and what different people went through.
\par If an outbreak ever happened again, all the people involved would hopefully have a better idea of how to handle the actual crisis and a better idea of people\rquote s needs for example, the farmers.  These are long term }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 
effects which}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  can\rquote t be ignored.
\par My Mum came out for a couple of nights. She loves coming out to see us as s
he lives in Carlisle it is a total change of scenery. She thought it was great and enjoyed taking my dog on long walks which she was unable to do for a long time..  We went to see the lambs in the lovely weather \endash 
 shows we are able to start enjoying the countryside again, especially coming up to Spring and Summer.
\par We were even able to go to Dalston with my dog and wander about.  We have been so used to having to stick t the roads just in the local area.  It was lovely, a nice change!
\par It does tend to make you more confident about the coming year and we are looking forward to the Summer!
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par Week 4 \endash  18}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  March 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 This past week started of with a day out at Bowness.  I went with my }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and took our dog, }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
.  It was lovely to let her off the lead to run, she really enjoys it and got absolutely filthy.  Travelling in the car is becoming easier for }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and she goes crazy when you arrive.  We have only had }{
\fs24\insrsid9131032 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  just over 2 years and for the past year we couldn\rquote t let her off the lead to run anywhere.  We are tir
ing t train her again, she listens to a certain extent, but we have to keep an eye on her cheeky side.  I remember wondering when the foot and mouth started how we were going to exercise }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
, as walking her on the roads used to be more difficult due to the large vehicles travelling up and down and also the fact }{\fs24\insrsid9131032 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  isn\rquote 
t the best on the lead.  She used to be really energetic  and a bit of a handful, however now she has got  used to a more relaxed life and at times I think she quite likes it.  It did us 
all good to have some exercise and fresh air and it was lovely to have a change of scenery. 
\par Apart from on Monday, I haven\rquote t really been anywhere else (apart from shopping) and have been busy doing my A-level work.  Therefore I haven\rquote t really noticed anything different this week and haven\rquote 
t thought about foot and mouth as much.
\par My overall view this week has been quite confident and there has been no real significant happenings to change my view.  Quite a good week overall!
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 5 \endash  25}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
Firstly I received the Newsletter sent out to the Standing panel.  It was a relief to finally get some information regarding the burial site.  It was good to have an explanation on how things work on the site in terms that we can understand.  It is a reli
e
f to know that everything so far is still safe, however, it is evident that there is much more work and monitoring to be carried out in the future.  Even though it is still not possible to do anything ourselves, our minds are at least put at rest by knowi
n
g something.  It surprises me how long it has taken for information like this to be made accessible to the public.  I think this newsletter is a very good step forward as information is reaching the public and participants are also given the opportunity t
o ask questions and put other ideas forward.
\par On Wednesday, My Mum came out again to see us.  Once again, we took a walk to go see the lambs in the field near us.  It was enjoyable and we had lovely weather!  It makes you realise how much you take for grante
d around you without thinking twice!  My Mum has made me realise this even more by seeing how much she enjoys such a simple thing and how special she thinks it is!  Sometimes I think when you are surrounded by the country and nature all the time you forge
t how lucky you are!  My Mum and Gran would both love to live somewhere like here!
\par The biggest surprise this week was when I received the parish magazine for the month and found in it the \'93Watchtree News\'94.  This is the first time I have ever seen anything l
ike this from the parish council.  I think it is a very good idea as the information will be accessible to everyone in the appropriate parishes. Even though it is long overdue it is very worthwhile and I think, will be very informative.  It covers a wide 
range of issues, the majority of which I knew very little about and wouldn\rquote 
t have known for the future for example, the maintenance going to be carried out between the A595 Orton Grange junction and the site entrance.  At least we now have knowledge of this before it is going to be carried out as it will }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 
affect}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  other members of our family who live on the Orton Grange junction, who would otherwise have had no }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 idea.}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
  Some of the information was surprising, for example the number of tankers that leave the site everyday which I didn\rquote t expect to be so high and which could rise.
\par Important issues are also now being tackled such as the bad state of the local roads. The affected people are also being encouraged to report these things themselves to the appropriate people.
\par I think this has been a significant development and will be very useful in the aftermath of foot and mouth.  Communication between the appropriate authorities and the public is essential! 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 6  1}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Unfortunately it has been all go this week
!  One bit of work after another!  I haven't had time to focus on very much else this past week. Despite this fact, I have still had quite a positive week. It is better studying out here as there are few distractions and everything is lovely and peaceful 
- a drastic difference from last year.  At that time it was difficult to concentrate on anything for too long!  Far too many distractions!
\par My }{\fs24\insrsid16534086 fianc\'e9}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  however has been up to the burial site and nearby on Sunday. He went for a drive with a friend and wondered 
what it looked like up there.  We have only ever seen it on television reports, but never been up there ourselves.
\par In a future diary when he has time, he will write a few words on what he thought! 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 7  8th April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Once again this week has been full of
 work!  I haven't had much time to do anything apart from work.  ON Thursday I had a break and my Mom came out for a BBQ.  For the first time this year, we have put out our patio tables and chairs as the weather was staying pleasant.  We sat out for a whi
le in the evening and had our BBQ.  It was a lovely break for my Mom as there is peace and quiet out here as opposed to in town.  We all really enjoyed it!
\par My Mom and }{\fs24\insrsid9131032 [f}{\fs24\insrsid13315664 iance}{\fs24\insrsid9131032 ]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  both commented how lovely it was to sit outside in the nice weather, without a na
sty smell about.  Over the past couple of weeks I haven't noticed things smelling so bad as on a few occasions recently.  There has also been a decrease in the amount of birds, in particular crows which have been in the fields to the south of where we are
 near the crossroads.  On the couple of occasions during the week when I have been past the fields there have only been a couple of birds flying around as opposed to a whole field full of crows at one time.
\par It was also lovely to hear the sheep, especially a
s the evening became darker.  In the background, you could hear the sheep, just in the field next to us and also the lambs a few fields away.  It was something which we still aren't quite used to, but which we appreciate so much more now!!
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 Week 8 15}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  April
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
I was feeling quite confident this week until Friday when watch the news. I saw the report on new Bovine TB cases which are worrying.  Even though it is said it wouldn\rquote 
t be as serious as foot and mouth it is still worrying as it has the potential to de
stroy many more lives and bankrupt more farmers who have probably just got over foot and mouth!  The worry must be especially bad for the farmers, as it is bad enough for the general public especially after seeing the damage caused by foot and mouth in su
ch a short space of time. It would be absolutely terrible if this summer was anything like last summer.  How long would it take for everything to get back to normal then?
\par Even though foot and mouth is evidently far different to Bovine TB hopefully things will have been learned from last year which will prevent this from becoming a disaster too!
\par Apart from that other aspects of the foot and mouth, smell etc, haven\rquote t been as bad this past week. I haven\rquote t noticed any particular occasions  whe
n the smell has been particularly bad or noticeable.  In addition, on the occasions when I have driven past the fields near the crossroads there have been hardly any crows near there, which is a huge improvement!  There were a number of seagulls in one fi
eld but nowhere   near the amount of crows there were before.
\par There has also been a decrease in the amount of tankers going by recently, that I have noticed.  At first I didn\rquote t take much notice of it but then }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fianc\'e9]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote 
s Grandad mentioned that he had hardly seen any.  He seems to notice them move more than we do as he lives on the Orton Grange junction with Wigton road  and they all have to go past there!
\par With all these things happening the presence of the burial site nearby seems less obvious!
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 Week 9 \endash  22}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 nd}{\b\insrsid4791720 
 April
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
The last week has been quite a pleasant week, probably because I have eventually finished my coursework and have been able to have a bit of peace and quiet!  I think this combined with periods of lovely weather have made me feel quite good.
\par On Tues
day, when I travelled to town and back I went past the fields near the crossroads to the south of the village which in the past have been full of crows or seagulls. As I have noticed on other odd occasions over the past week, they appear to be empty now. 
 I\rquote ll keep an eye on how this changes over the summer if it does.
\par On Friday, I noticed that there were a number of cattle and calves in the field just opposite our house. I can stand and watch them from my back patio doors which is lovely.  With the reintro
duction of the sheep and cattle in the area, it is like everything is coming together finally after the foot and mouth, and life is returning to normal in some sense. The cattle seem to be the last part needed for everything to seem to be running properly
 and the animals finally moving about at last. 
\par I think this fact combine with their being no significant incidents of nasty smells or the rumbling of the tankers going by, has made things seem better.
\par When talking to }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad, he mentioned again that there still haven\rquote 
t been as many tankers going past his house at Orton Grange as there have been.    This past week there have been hardly any reminders of the burial site and the past foot and mouth problems.  Living in the country has seemed quite n
ormal after what seems a long time!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 Week 10  29}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  April

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
All in all this week has been a good week overall!  With regard to the foot and mouth everything seems to have quietened down and there are hardly any visible reminders of the burial site and foot an
d mouth around the village.  As I mentioned last week, there still haven\rquote 
t been any noticeable occasions of smells, possibly from the burial site; the tankers have hardly been noticeable around the village and the fields near the crossroads have still been fairly empty of birds, in particular crows.
\par This was explained and backed up in the Watchtree Newsletter in the parish magazines which I received this week.  It was good to read and very informative \endash  worth reading.  I still think it is a good idea and is
 being done well as it discusses issues happening now and also keeps you informed about action in the future.  The newsletter mentioned the reduction in the amount of tankers which I have noticed.  It also mentions that there might be a slight smell from 
the burial sited during work but so far I haven\rquote t noticed anything.  Once again it has been lovely seeing both the sheep and the cows in the surrounding fields especially at the moment when they are with their young.
\par On Saturday on the way down to }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote 
s Grandad there were road works near the Baldwinholme bend in the road.  This part was in a bad condition and is now much better!  I think the damage was caused by the trucks etc used during foot and mouth.  However I\rquote m not sure!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 Week 11 6}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  May
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 This week has been my 21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 Birthday!  I\rquote m growing up!  I had a lovely day on Thursday and as a surprise I was taken t the Lake District for the day.  It was lovely and I really enjoyed it!  Firstly we stopped off at Bassenthwaite lake for a bit, fed the du
cks and had a picnic.  Then off to Dodd Wood for a coffee and to see the Ospreys.  It was great to see them and I think we were quite lucky.  Then we had a pleasant walk around Myre House.
\par I was reminded of how lucky we are in Cumbria to have such lovely places and I am glad that we are now able to go to these places again.  Now we\rquote 
ve got a car we are going to take better advantage of Cumbria and what it has to offer.  Once again I realised how much we take what we have for granted.
\par Overall this has been a good week and reminders of foot and mouth and the burial site have been minimal.  There have been no smells I have noticed, and hardly any signs of wagons.  It is still lovely to see the sheep and cattle around the village!
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 12 \endash  13}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 On Wednesday
 I met my Mum in town and got the Cumberland News off her.  I was reading about the County Council Inquiry at Kendal.  I think it is good how the different people involved in the inquiry are all being honest about what happened.  That is the only way anyt
hing will be improved in the future if anything of a similar nature should happen again.  I really hope it doesn\rquote 
t.  From reading the articles written and what people have said, it is clear what a wide range of people the foot and mouth crisis affected and 
also how badly.  When you read of other people who have had family who have been so low it has driven them to suicide you do seem to feel a bit guilty as when we complain, it hasn\rquote 
t affected us is such a drastic way.  It brings the seriousness and the extent of the crisis to people\rquote 
s attention.  Despite the terrible things which took place during the crisis hopefully some good will come out of it for the present and the future.
\par On Thursday }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  went to the doctor\rquote s and was talking to a farmer in the waiting room.  As soon as }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 mentioned he lived in Great Orton, the farmer asked straight away what it was like to live here so near to the burial site and how he couldn\rquote t imagine what it would have been like.  It too has been such a long time since any
one has said anything like that to either one of us.  At the time of the foot and mouth crisis people used to ask questions and what it was like to live so near.  It is strange when farmers in particular, feel sympathy towards you for living near the buri
al site, when on the other hand it is the farmers I feel sympathy for.
\par Before the foot and mouth crisis a fair number of people even from Carlisle didn\rquote t know where Great Orton was\rquote  but now many do and realise how close to Carlisle it actually is!  
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par Week 13 - 20}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720   May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
I haven't really done anything very exciting this past week, unfortunately, I've been revising again and preparing for a presentation for my A-level which I have to do next week.  My presentation was on 'turrets and watchtowers' which I
 found a bit confusing at first from the books I've been using so dragged }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  (to drive) and }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 out past Brampton to Hadrian's Wall.  There I found a watchtower and a turret - everything became much clearer!  On the way back we spotted a sign for a
 camping barn on Hadrian's Wall (Banks East).  We were both very interested so sent away for the brochure.  At this point we decided to reconsider our holiday plans, and realised we didn't need to go far afield, like Amsterdam (our 1st choice); then Scotl
and (2}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 nd}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  choice).  We hadn't realised actually how many places there were so nearby which were ideal.  We came to the conclusion a holiday in Cumbria would be the best choice as 1. We could take }{
\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  with us; 2 we could go by car and 3 it would be a bit cheaper.  As }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 mentioned, it would also be good after everything to put the money we were spending back into Cumbria.
\par We were hoping to go next week as it is half term the week after and my exams after that!  Hopefully we will get something organised!
\par On Thursday we got the Orton newsletter. }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 and I were both quite disappointed when we read that land around this area are being sold for the building of houses. It is good in a way as people are moving forward after F&M but we wish it wasn't in a r
esidential sense.  It is just a pity so much of the farming will be lost (6 houses at Baldwinholme, 4 in Great Orton).  Even though I haven't been brought up with a farming background from what I have seen it would be a pity for us to lose this part of ou
r countryside.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 14 - 27}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720   May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 On Monday saw }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 CB}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and was pleased to hear the F&M standing panel project was going well as I think it\rquote s worthwhile and as much as possible should be learned for the future.
\par On Tuesday I attended the meeting for the foot a
nd mouth disease inquiry at Great Orton village hall at 7pm.  I was glad I attended the meeting as people could voice their opinions and try to get information about issues, both about the present and the future.  My general view of the meeting and how it
 
went was that the general feeling of the villagers etc. was that they were losing interest and nothing was still being done. There were many empty seats, I estimated a total number of 50-60 people. There was a whole new panel of faces, even though this wa
s
 a new inquiry so there were new people on  the panel but between the meetings there is no feel of continuity as no-one is sure of what has been said before and there are never the answers promised from one meeting to another.  It seems as if this is a wa
y of avoiding answers and getting out of situations.
\par There were new aspects which were brought up which had not yet been disclosed (never at any meeting I have attended) such as the fact the burial was planned and used for the burial of uninfected animals, 
which is not what we were led to believe with al the engineering on site \endash  again this is lack of communication and no-one is sure of the facts.  DEFRA also are only guaranteeing funding for this site for the next 5 years and it is worrying who
\rquote s burden this will become after then.?
\par A variety of other issues were discussed \endash  health, roads, handling of outbreak, vaccination etc.
\par After the meeting I was glad I had been, however I felt rather angry by the way in which the questions are handled.  The answers are often vague, have no supporting evidence or are dismissed with \'93I\rquote ll have to get back to you on that\'94 or, 
\'93I can\rquote t comment\'94.
\par In my opinion many of the farmers, villagers etc just want this whole thing brought to an end.  Ideally the remaining trenches fil
led in, a nature reserve created and maintained.  There were no guarantees of the site not being  used again or funding after the next five years.  Will this ever be achieved?
\par On Saturday morning }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I decided to go away for a short break to somewhere near and where we could take }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
.  It was a spontaneous decision for the Jubilee and because it was half term, I was not at college.  We ended up going to a caravan site with }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 for 4 nights!  I will update about my holiday in the next diary!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\fs24\insrsid4791720\charrsid13373179 Clipping from News and Star here \endash 
 story about Great Orton public meeting and villagers\rquote  request not to have site used again in the event of future emergencies}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 . 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par 
\par HOLIDAY - Week beginning Monday 3}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 rd}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  June
\par 
\par 
\par Week 15  10th June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 I am writing this a couple of da
ys early just to tell you about our holiday!  It was lovely!  In the end we hadn't yet received the brochure on the camping barns so on Saturday we decided we would like to go away as son as possible and would like something for the Jubilee weekend.  Afte
r finding a caravan at Caldbeck, not far away, relatively quiet, we went.  By 5 pm on Saturday, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 and I were there!  It was a lovely caravan site; lovely caravan and even a TV for the World Cup!
\par The caravan site was surrounded by common land sheep - lovely and quiet and a lot of places to keep }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 occupied. We were so surprised at how quiet the campsite was over the Jubilee weekend but thought most of the people actually lived there.  It would be lovely in the future to have a small caravan there to go away to!
\par The surrounding places we went to were really busy for example Keswick, Bassenthwaite etc.
\par I was quite surprised but thought it was great to see Cumbria lively again!  What a contrast to what I would have imagined these places to be like a year ago!  Especially for the Jubilee, everyone seemed to make such an effort - it was lovely to see!

\par We all had a lovely time, so relaxing!  OI don't think }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  has ever walked so far!
\par We were surprised that somewhere so close was exactly what we wanted!  We were also happy we could put our money back into Cumbria. We would definitely go back!
\par I feel so much more confident about the future especially in Cumbria after this week. If you didn't know about last year F&M outbreak in some cases it would be hard to tell! I really think Cumbria seems as if it could recover from this, hopefully.
\par 
\par On Saturday and Sunday - ill in bed.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 16    17th June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 With the combination of not feeling very well at the beginning of the week; the car not running overt the week-end; and }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 being in season, I haven't really been able to go anywhere this week. It has been quite frustrating but I have had work to do anyway.  I still feel quite confident about th
e future this week after being on holiday.  This is better than a couple of weeks ago after the FMD Inquiry meeting when I felt quite unsure at time of what was going to happen at Gt Orton.
\par I had the F&M Panel newsletter and 'Watchtree Newsletter' (with Pa
rish Magazine). I think both of these are good as you are able to gain information consistently about F&M in Cumbria, and in particular the burial site.  This information would be difficult to come by otherwise.  In particular I enjoyed reading about chil
dren at Milburn School with their memories of the F&M outbreak and the effort they have made.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\fs24\insrsid4791720\charrsid13373179 Researcher had spoken with }{\i\fs24\insrsid11752868 respondent}{\i\fs24\insrsid4791720\charrsid13373179  about possibility of monthly diary and she decided to start straight away - so al
though middle of month, here follows monthly write up.    }{\i\fs24\insrsid2116861 She }{\i\fs24\insrsid4791720\charrsid13373179 
continued to record her diary in this way.  At times she offers short daily entries, drawing 4 weeks together within an overall reflective piece.   These daily entries are also recorded}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  . 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par Week 20    15}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720   July}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  
\par (Writing up after 4 weeks)
\par I am looking forward to attending the social evening in Dalston.  I am a bit nervous as am not used to doing these sorts of things but think it will be a good experience.  I was also pleased when I got the F&M
 panel newsletter and saw the article I made notes for. I have never done anything like this before and was quite pleased about the whole thing! 
\par On the Saturday of week one, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I went down to }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 's Grandad's and noticed there were more sign
s up for land being for sale. Again we both think this is quite sad as the area will inevitable be changing in the near future.  We wonder how much of the land will be reused for farming or sold for new houses.  Taking into consideration the signs we have
 seen up in the past, quite a bit of land is going to change.
\par Over the past weeks I have also received the 'Watchtree'}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\cs22\super\insrsid4791720 \chftn }{\insrsid4791720  Through consultations with}{\cf1\insrsid4791720  the Environment Agency (EA), the British Army and  MAFF (now part of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), }{\insrsid4791720 
 Watchfield a  former WW11 airfield site, }{\cf1\insrsid4791720 was selected as a mass 2001 FMD, culling and disposal site.  The airfield is located about  15 km to the west of Carlisle and covers an  area of land of about 83 hectares (ha), approximately
 50 ha of which, have been used for burials.  In 2002, Watchtree Nature Reserve was formed.  In May 2003, there was a memorial service and an unveiling of a memorial stone that commemorates the  hundreds of thousands of livestock buried there.  For furthe
r information, please see  }{\field{\*\fldinst {\cf1\insrsid4791720  HYPERLINK "http://www.watchtree.com/" }{\cf1\insrsid16343758 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000001a00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e007700610074006300680074007200650065002e0063006f006d002f000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b3400000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e0077006100
74006300680074007200650065002e0063006f006d002f0000000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs24\ul\cf2\insrsid4791720 http://www.watchtree.com/}}}{\cf1\insrsid4791720 , last accessed 30/03/06.}}}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 newsletter with our parish magazine. I still think this is a good idea and worthwhile as you are updated every so often. This will also reach everyone in the village, so easily accessible.
\par Over a period of a few days in week 2 of these 4 weeks, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I both noticed a strange smell outside.  We could smell it here but not at }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
's Grandad's which is only 2 miles away. It smelt just like a burning smell, so I am not sure whether it had anything to do with the burial site or anything being done up there.  I just thought I would mention it anyway!
\par Last Wednesday I rang up the Archaeological Support group in Carlisle of which I have 
been a member for the past year and a half.  I had never been sent anything to do with it for along time and wondered why.  It turns out that last year as soon as F&M hit Cumbria, everything was cancelled and stopped. This I knew at the time and there was
 
nothing else that could have happened. The thing I didn't realise was that things have been so badly affected that nothing has been arranged as yet, even so many months after F&M broke out. Once again this is another example of how things have been affect
ed still so many months after.  There is also uncertainty about the future of this archaeology group as nothing has been decided yet and it will depend on how things go.  This is a pity and I hope things pick up in the future!
\par On the first week of these 4 weeks, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I both noticed that we were coughing a bit more, especially at night and early in the morning.  Since then }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{
\fs24\insrsid4791720  has got better and is not coughing as much but now I have got a sore throat and a cold.  I don't think this is anything to do with the burial site or anything, but we were not sure about the coughing and I thought I would mention it.

\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 12}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  August - Writing up after 4 weeks
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 I do not feel quite as nervous now as I did about the evening at Dalston Village hall.  It was a bit i
ntimidating at first as I was going on the same night as frontline workers and health professionals.  I felt a bit out of my depth when I wondered what sort of stories they would be telling, compared to what I had seen.  These people would have had to dea
l with the situation first hand and must have seen some terrible things. After a couple of weeks I grew used to the idea and didn't feel as bad, it would turn out to be a good experience. As it turns out the evening is now on the 21}{
\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  August and everyone is going together, things will be a bit more relaxed for me, I think.  I hope I will be able to make it!
\par The one major event that has made me think over the past couple of week is }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 's Auntie Jean who has moved house from Orton Grange (2 miles away fro
m us) into the middle of town.  It made me think that i definitely wouldn't like to move back into the middle of Carlisle after living here. Even though it hasn't been the most pleasant at times here with F&M last year and the building of the burial site,
 
I would still miss everything about it.  Once again I am reminded how lucky I am to be surrounded by fields, cows, sheep and a horse in the overlooking field.  It is also usually quiet and peaceful - I can imagine quite different to the middle of Carlisle
.  I think Jean will miss it quite a lot!
\par Just over a week ago, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I were busy getting our garde
n ready for the Village in Bloom. It was good to see everyone making an effort to everything looking nice.  Everything felt a bit more normal this year, whereas last year I think the Village in Bloom was the last thing on most people's minds!  It made me 
feel more confident about the future!  Perhaps everything or most things may return to normal eventually!
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week 24   12}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  August 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Nothing extremely significant concerning F&M has happened this week.
\par I have noticed, though, now when working at village pub \endash  Wellington \endash 
 even though I only do 1 day, it has really become quite busy.  I think business has improved after they tried more advertising.  I can remember back to during the Foot and Mouth outbreak \endash  it was very  quiet, most people stayed away and the at
mosphere in the pub was very depressing.  Now, over a year later things do seem to be picking up again and perhaps returning more to normal.  It is god to see!}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday 19}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  August
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 All in all it has been a quiet week, I haven\rquote 
t really been out very much and not feeling well really.  I was a bit disappointed not being able to attend the social evening o Wednesday as my Mom was unable to get time off work or change her shift.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par 26}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  August 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 First of all we were noticing problems with our goldfish \endash 
 when we first got them about two and a half years ago we had very few problems with them.  Over the past few months they have been getting ill.  We have tried all sorts (different chemicals) and still they have all died except one.  Omar, }{
\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote 
s cousin, who breeds fish came and had a look  and was baffled!  The only explanation is that the chemicals have been changed or increased, for example the chlorine which there appears to be a lot more of.  We obviously aren\rquote t totally sure what 
the problem is but thought we should mention it anyway.
\par This week I also noticed the banner opposite the village shop in the village.  I have enclosed an article about this banner which appeared in the Cumberland News this week.  I think this sums up the m
ood I have noticed at the village meetings.  Nothing has yet been done to help the villagers etc, so what difference have the promises made?
\par This is the main reason why I feel less confident about the future this week regarding foot and mouth as these things are still dragging on.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday 2}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  September
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 During the first week of these diaries nothing really significant happened regarding foot and mouth.  I did comment, however, that when working at the pub on Sundays, how busy the pub was and how business ha
d seemed to improve a lot from what I had seen during the foot and mouth crisis. The atmosphere then had been depressing.  This made me feel more confident about the future regarding foot and mouth as another aspect of the foot and mouth had seemed to ret
urn back to normal.
\par This mood however did change during the third week of these diaries when I felt less confident about the future.  It all began when our goldfish started dying apart from oner.  We still are not sure exactly what caused it and are not sur
e whether or not it was because of the water here or something we did.  There just seems to be that little bit of doubt in my mind as you don\rquote t feel totally sure about what is happening  in this area still, and therefore, I don\rquote 
t think, really trust the or
ganisations dealing with these issues.  The other thing that seemed to sum up some of my feelings was the banner which appeared opposite the village shop last week .  I think this shows the desperation and lengths some of the people in the village have to
 go through in order to get noticed and heard.  It seems ridiculous  that the same basic issues brought up in the earlier meetings have still not been dealt with.  It does make you lose the trust you had in the organisations involved (article enclosed).

\par This past week has been a little better, however, not that good.  I did receive the Watchtree Newsletter, in the Parish magazine, which is still good to receive as it updates you on a number of different aspects of the burial site.
\par I also heard about the article in the newspaper regarding this inquiry from Cathy as well as my Mom who has saved it for me but as yet I have not read it.  I will comment on this in my next diary. 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 
\par 9-15 September
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Got free News & Star last week and found article on F&M diaries \endash  not too bothered that it has been printed myself.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Saw Cathy \endash  said about articles \endash  not too bothered myself but can see why otherwise involved would be as things are not represented in the right way and are misleading.  Good point though is that it may catch people
\rquote s attention \endash  and get the point across that people are still suffering.  Got article from Cumberland news \endash  Mum.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Saturday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Found article in Cumberland News regarding Village in Bloom \endash  won a trophy for our special efforts in village in aftermath of F&M crisis (Mark Andrews trophy).
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 16-22 September
\par Monday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I noticed a burning smell when we came back home in the evening.  Not sure what it is from \endash  reminds us of F&M crisis.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Wednesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Road works in village \endash  didn\rquote t affect us too much.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Thursday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Road works between here and }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad\rquote s \endash  annoying at times \endash  has taken such a long time to do \endash  reminds us of F&M crisis.  }{
\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I noticed a burning smell again \endash  not sure where from.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Friday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Good that Watchtree Newsletter told us of these road works as wouldn\rquote t have known.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Saturday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 These aspects aren\rquote t too bad on their own but the atmosphere reminds you of the F&M crisis last year.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 23-29 September
\par Monday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Read the Diarist and also had a look at the Inquiry Report I was sent after attending the village meeting.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Have not had time to read very much of it but I will get round to it and then comment on it.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Friday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Parish magazine and Watchtree Newsletter \endash  still good to be updated on what is going on \endash  1. Roads and  2. Visiting the site.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 30-6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  October
\par Monday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Rang up to book table at the Autumn Fayre being done in village hall \endash  people pleased that people in village getting involved!
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Water has been quite bad especially on Tuesday \endash  full of chlorine \endash  had to leave for a while for everything to evaporate.  Makes you quite concerned about whether or not it is safe to drink!
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  October - Writing after 4 weeks  
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 During week I  read the articles regarding those F&M diaries which appeared in the Cumberland News and the News and Star (they are enclosed).  After reading these and }{\fs24\insrsid8730315 s}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 peaking to C}{
\fs24\insrsid8730315 ,}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  I myself wasn\rquote t too bothered or offended by what was written but could easily have seen why other p
eople would have been specially if they are finding things really difficult.  I think there is a good side to these articles as well though as they will have grabbed people\rquote 
s attention and highlighted the fact  that there are still problems regarding F&M t
his long after the crisis.  Even though the articles were misleading they have also done some good! When reading the Cumberland News I also found a mention of Great Orton regarding the Village in Bloom.  It turns out we were awarded the Mark Andrews troph
y for special efforts during the aftermath of F&M.  It would have been nice to win a better award but at least we were recognised for something!  I was quite please!
\par 
\par Week 2 was probably the worst week I have had during the past month regarding F&M as the whole week just seemed to remind me of what it was like during the crisis!
\par Firstly there were road works between here and }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad\rquote s (only 2 miles away).  I understand these had to be carried out but it made it difficult and inconvenient to get to }{
\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad\rquote s as you didn\rquote 
t know which roads were gong to be closed when!  Now that the work has been done everyone that I have spoken to about it think they will cause more trouble than before as when you pull out of the lay bys it is dangerous as
 the grass and verge have not been smoothed out.  I think they are alright if you already know the roads but I wouldn\rquote t be as confident if I hadn\rquote t driven on them before!
\par The other aspect which made the road works seem worse were two instances when }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 and I both noticed a burning smell (Monday and Thursday).  We were not sure where this came from but it still reminded us of the crisis.
\par 
\par On week 3 I received a copy of the F&M Inquiry and glad I went to a meting in the village \endash  sometimes it feels good to be involved even though in such a small way!
\par I also received the \lquote Diarist\rquote  newsletter and \lquote Watchtree\rquote  newsletter which I am still glad I receive.  Without the Watchtree Newsletter I don\rquote t think I would have been informed of the road works being carried 
out!  I am also glad the site is progressing and that people are now being given the opportunity to visit the site if they wish.
\par 
\par On week 4 there was only one major problem with our water.  On Tuesday the water was that full of chlorine that we had to leave it for all the chlorine in it to evaporate, or boil it, even to give }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 a drink!  This is the second time this has happened and it does concern you as firstly why is this being done and secondly is the water safe to drink?  We are not sure who to cont
act about this as last time we contacted United Utilities who said it was just routine and nothing to worry about! 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 7}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Not much this week regarding FMD \endash  think I have been too busy thinking about other things.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 14}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday
\par Relaxing a bit today as going to be a busy day tomorrow and away on Wednesday.
\par Tuesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s exam \endash  turned out to be quiet here today which was good for }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s exam as he did it at home \endash 
 would have been difficult last year with pressure of F&M.
\par Weds
\par Away on holiday!  It was a bit of a drive to what we are used to but we made it!  Lovely views on way down and Hawkshead a lovely place!
\par Thursday
\par This holiday very well suited for }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  as plenty of places to walk, a quiet campsite and shops and pubs which are suited for dogs \endash  things she is not quite used to!
\par Friday
\par Lovely to be away for a break away from Great Orton on the one hand but then you remember how nice it is where we are and how luck we are on the other hand.
\par Sunday
\par Had a very good week and confident about the future.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 21st October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday
\par Having quiet week as just got back. Quite tired but coping ok \endash  nice to be back in a way!
\par Weds
\par Got Watchtree Newsletters in Parish magazine.  Also article out of News and Star (I think) \endash  about renaming of site and farm that used to be there!
\par Thursday
\par Watchtree Newsletter \endash  interested in the Open Day \endash  think it\rquote s a good idea and will be very interesting (especially geology and 
fossil remains found on site).  I think would be beneficial as even though we live in the village and have been to the meetings \endash  still have little idea of how the site looks now and will in the future!
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 28th October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Weds
\par Went to meet Mom in town.  The roads into town were terrible.  Mud on road everywhere and really busy with trucks etc.  Must be where they are doing new building \endash  hope it doesn\rquote 
t get like this all the time as so much land round here seems to have been sold for new construction!
\par  Sat
\par Mom has got her own stall this week-end at the Craft Fair in the Village hall. 1}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  time she has done this \endash  saw it in Parish newsletter.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 2}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  November \endash  Writing after 4 weeks
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 This past month has been one of the busiest I have had for a long time!  Firstly there was }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s final exam \endash 
 which was quite stressful for him at times, revising and everything!  It reminded me of how difficult it had been when we were doing our first exams a year and a half before, during F&M crisis.  Studying had be
en very difficult then due to constant interruptions and distractions \endash  constant sound of trucks; smells; noise; tension!  I\rquote m so glad it wasn\rquote t this bad this year as these things can be stressful enough!
\par Shortly after }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s exam, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 , my Mom and I went for a short break to Hawkshead. It was great!  We all enjoyed it and }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 
[dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  especially!  Everything was suited for }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  \endash  we took her shopping (there are benches and water bowls outside every shop!); we went for a bar meal and sat outside with her!
 And on our last night even too her with us and went for a pint.  Apart from these things we also took her on plenty of walks!  Being there made you realise how lovely Cumbria is and how people who don\rquote 
t live here are attracted to it!  It is a pity how Cum
bria suffered during F&M crisis as it is such a lovely place!  I do hope that due to the large amount of attractions in Cumbria  that things will hopefully be back to normal as can be expected!  I was quite surprised at how busy things were for that time 
of year \endash  it seems things must be improving which makes you confident!  I enjoyed my break but you realise maybe Great Orton isn\rquote t such a bad place to come back to!
\par During the past month I have also received the Watchtree Newsletter.  I\rquote m quite interested in the Open Day later on this month \endash  I think it will be very interesting. I\rquote 
m really interested in the geology, history of the site and also fossils found there during this work. I don\rquote t know much about how the site looks or how it will be in the future.  
It is amazing that you can live so near but  still have no idea of what it is like!  All I can seem to remember are the pictures that were shown on the news months ago \endash  it seems difficult to imagine it any different!
\par This past week has been very busy as m
y Mom is having a stall for the first time at the Craft fair in the village hall!  I have been helping her a little bit and helped her on the stall (I just sat with her really!).  She decided to have a go as she likes crafts and is always making things!  
It was nice to be involved in the village and the money from the hiring of the stalls went to the church which is good!  It was very quiet on Saturday though and apparently that was the worst it\rquote 
s been for a few years!  I wonder if this is an effect of the F&M, however the weather and other factors may have contributed!
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par Week beginning Monday 11}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  November
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720  \endash  Doctors
\par Wednesday
\par Me Dentist and in town with Mam.  Missed the Exhibition at the Village Hall, disappointed but got an article from the Cumberland News (this is included).  I haven\rquote t spoke with anyone that went \endash 
 no-one has mentioned anything to me.  Disappointed I missed it and also because this is probably one of the only opportunities we will get to know anything.
\par }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720  and I both agree it is still like a big secret \endash  no-one really allowed in and out.  It doesn\rquote t feel like local people are benefiting at all!  Is it anything to do with us really?
\par Friday
\par Children in Need at the pub yesterday \endash  nice to see people taking part again \endash  big difference to during Foot and Mouth.  We just made a donation, it was a bit busy for us.  \'a31045 raised!
\par Sunday
\par Work at pub \endash  still very busy the pub \endash  at least it seems to have recovered after F&M, but from what I have heard they did suffer badly, along with the other businesses here!
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid4791720 Week beginning 18}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  November \tab 
\par }{\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par Should have been playing darts at Port Carlisle.  Had a break for a week \endash  the thing that is worrying about playing darts away is the travelling \endash  some of the country roads round here are terrible!  Is this  because of the wagons? \endash 
 especially near Wiggonby!
\par The road at }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Granddad just gets worse! It\rquote s just mud and less grass!  Terrible!  Is it because of damage done by wagons and a combination of all the flooding in the area now?
\par Saturday
\par }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720  and I talking about how the area has changed!  We remembered back to 4 years ago when we used to go to the airfield/b
urial site for some peace.  Even though only rubble then, really enjoyed it there.  We could take the dog, had first driving lesson off }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720 
 - not again!  Had some fun and really miss it at times.  Nowhere round here anymore to get peace!  Can\rquote t even enjoy the nature reserve \endash  very frustrating!   
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid4791720 Week beginning Monday 25}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  November
\par }{\insrsid4791720 Monday
\par Keep realising when doing diaries that haven\rquote t had a chance to look at Cumbria Foot and Mouth disease inquiry report \endash  will have to make time for it soon!
\par Saturday
\par When I was at pub \endash  talking about new fence on park for children.  General mood is, not very pleased as it doesn\rquote t fit into a country village setting and nothing else done!
\par Sunday
\par Can\rquote t believe it is the beginning of December!  Everything is passing too quick.  Inevitable! 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid4791720 31}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\b\insrsid4791720  November \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks
\par }{\insrsid4791720 The past 4 weeks have been very busy compared to what I am used to and at the same time have been quite frustrating in a few ways!  The issues which have bothered }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720 
 and I most are mainly to do with the onset of winter, which of course is inevitable but this year they seem to be worse than we can previously remember since living here in winter!
\par 
\par The biggest issue is the state of the roads in the village and round about, it is terrible!  With the amount of rain we have had there are puddles everywhere and everything is turning to mud!  The worst thing is that it is very difficult to walk or take }
{\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\insrsid4791720  anywhere which is frustrating.  You either get absolutely filthy or when walking down the roads you have to get soaked on the sides of the roads to avoid cars and going down the lonning isn\rquote 
t really an option as it is really muddy and there has been dumping.  We understand most of this will be due to the weather but we are sure some of it on the roads is due to all the traffic there has been, especially at }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{
\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Granddad's.  Outside the front of his gate and garden, the grass has gradually been stripped away and has now turned to mud.  In all the ears he has lived there (50 years) he has never seen it as bad!
\par The roads aren\rquote t like this just nearby, I have noticed other roads round about are also in a bad state when I have travelled away to other nearby village pubs when playing darts.
\par I was disappointed when I missed the
 exhibition, at the Village hall, about the Watchtree Reserve as I had to go up town, etc.  I have not spoken to anyone I know that attended the exhibition, but wish there were more opportunities to learn more about it.  I did find a newspaper article (en
closed) about the Watchtree.  It is quite annoying that this won\rquote t be open to the public.  It is understandable why this isn't possible but then on the other hand it is not benefiting anyone really who lives nearby.
\par }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720  and I still remember back to whe
n the airfield was still there and it was a lovely place to go walking and to relax by getting away from everything. It used to be lovely and quiet and was also so nearby.  We do actually quite miss it sometimes as there is nowhere else like that round he
re now.
\par Even though there have been quite a few negative issues this past month, it has also been encouraging when I have been working at the pub.  It has been very busy when I have been there showing that it must be recovering from the effect of the Foot a
nd Mouth crisis. It was also encouraging when there was a night held for Children in Need when they raised approx. \'a3
1045. It is good to see people involved and happy again!  One thing which I did notice was that the general mood about the improvements made
 to the park was not very good.  People were not impressed that the new fence does not look like it belongs to the country at all and that that is all that has changed.  I have not had time but will go and have a look for myself!
\par }{\b\insrsid4791720 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  December 2002 \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 Average \endash  I haven\rquote t felt too bad over Christmas \endash  a little tired but since I have got a bit of a cold and sore throat \endash  not surprising at this time of year!
\par Average \endash  I think it has been all right, haven\rquote t been able to walk very far near village due to weather and roads \endash  but this isn\rquote t surprising at this time of year!
\par These past 4 weeks have been rather hectic with Christmas and everything but I have still had quite a bit to write in my diaries concerning foot and mouth.
\par I received the Parish magazine for December in which there was a thank you to all involved in the Craft Fayre and there was \'a3
1 008 raised for St Giles church.  It was good to be able to contribute to something in the village (well it was my Mum really, but I helped!).  It is good to see these sorts of things happening here \endash  it\rquote 
s good for the village after everything!
\par I also received the Watchtree Newsletter in the Parish magazine .  It is still good to receive this as it updates you on everything and also had information r
egarding the exhibition at the village hall, which I missed..  I am glad it was a success and people attended, especially the school children who were taken!
\par I also received the \lquote Diarist\rquote  which is good to read.  It is interesting to see what other panel members are up to \endash  and is surprising what things can lead to!  For example the diarist and the Samson tractor!
\par Over the past couple of weeks I have also collected  a couple of articles from the Cumberland News.  The first one, \lquote Lie returns to Watchtree\rquote  act
ually made me feel better that we were going to get something positive out of this whole experience \endash  but the only problem is that at some moments in time this won\rquote 
t be enough for some people involved as it does not change what happened and won\rquote t make up for what has been lost!  I think it just depends on how you are feeling at the time when reading the articles.  The other article , \lquote 
Village in running for top country award\rquote , was also quite pleasing as at least we, as a village, are being remembered and re
cognised for what we went through.  It is surprising that now so long after the actual Foot and Mouth crisis that we are finally being recognised and so many things are now being written in the paper!
\par Over the Christmas period I have only really had one th
ing to complain about and that is the state of the roads!  After the rain, the roads have been terrible to drive on with the flooding and the road sides turning into mud!  Everything is filthy!  I know this is expected in winter, out in the country but si
nce I have been here it has never been so bad, especially at }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad\rquote s!
\par One improvement is the signs which have been put up at the passing places between here and }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Grandad.  }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 and I both think these are much, much better and a lot safer!  We have also spotted a couple of signs from \lquote Watchtree\rquote , which have been up now for a while, but are still surprising to see!
\par Now it is time to start everything again the New Year and hopefully this will be a better year for Great Orton than the 
past couple has been!  I am glad it is going to be quiet here now for when I start my studying, as opposed to the foot and mouth when studying was very, very difficult!
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 Monday 27}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  January \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid4791720 This week I found an article in the Daily mail which I thought was relevant. It is called 
\lquote Boom and Doom\rquote  and is about house prices all over England.  For 2002, prices in North Yorkshire rose by 66% but in Allerdale they only rose by 8%.  It did not mentio
n why this was but some of it must be the result of the Foot and Mouth crisis and the effect on the area since then.  This made me think about the effect on Great Orton and how difficult it would probably be to sell houses here, and if people would really
 
want to move  here. There are two sides however, as if more property was built in Great Orton and the surrounding area, things would probably change and Great Orton might lose some of its farming background.  I definitely wouldn't want it to change too mu
ch, despite the burial site, I like it just the way it is!  
\par The great thing about this week is the weather, for once!  We have been able to go down the lonning with }{\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\insrsid4791720  without getting filthy as it is frosty!  It has been great!
\par 
\par I can\rquote 
t believe how quickly 2003 is passing!  It is February already!  This past month has been totally hectic with appointments; arrangement; birthdays and the Open University!  It makes you realise that whatever happens, time goes on!  I think this must have 
been very difficult for people directly involved in the Foot and Mouth crisis, as life would have had to carry on despite whatever was going on in their own lives.  I think as time has gone on I have got more used to the idea of \lquote Watchtree\rquote 
 and accept it more now!
\par I received the \lquote Watchtree News\rquote  during the previous week.  It is good to hear that the restoration and creation of the site is finally complete.  Overall, I don\rquote 
t think it has taken as long as I thought it would for the nature reserve to be established, especially when you compare it to how long it has taken for the children\rquote 
s playground to be improved!  Nearly two years after the Foot and Mouth crisis!  However it is better late than never!
\par I am pleased at how the nature reserve sounds, with al the different species of animal which had been included or seen, especially the \lquote merlin\rquote , the smallest bird of prey, which was sited.  }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720 
 and I both find these things very interesting!  It is good that this is happening so close to us!  Last year we travelled to see the Osprey viewpoint, it was great!
\par Over the past couple of weeks I have also found a few more articles. Two of these are regarding the \rquote 20 day standstill\rquote . With not been directly involved in the farming side of the foot and mouth crisis, I a
m not totally sure about all these sorts of rules, etc, but think it is good that at least things are trying to be improved for the future in case this may happen again and also as a result of learning from past events.  There was also an article showing 
\lquote Watchtree\rquote  as a finalist for the \lquote Environmental Project Award\rquote .
\par I definitely think that \lquote Watchtree\rquote  deserves to be considered for this award as so much has happened here and at least some good is going to come out of it!  It would be nice to get this sort 
of award in recognition of the hard work of the people involved!
\par I think this year will hopefully be a better one for Cumbria, and people may have confidence.  Even though the Foot and Mouth crisis was a tragedy, I think Cumbria and the people in it are ab
le to recover from it as people from the newspaper articles, seem more optimistic and this rubs off on you!  I think this year will be a better one and feel more confident about the future at this point! 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid4791720 Monday 24}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720   February \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 So far these past four weeks I have not receive a \lquote Watchtree newsletter\rquote 
 but there was a small mention in the parish magazine about he playground. Work is underway and it is hoped to be finished by the summer.  It seems to be taking a long time to get the
 playground sorted but at least it will be good for the kids in the summer holidays. It is better late than never!
\par There is only one thing that has bothered us over these past weeks, our fish.  Whenever we change the water, the fish seem to be ill and now 
we have had to add more and more chemicals to reduce the amount of chlorine that seems to be in the water.  We did originally start off with 13 fish and now only have 2 left. It does make you worry about the state of our water and why more chemicals are p
ossibly being added.  The fact that the burial site is so near, does make you worry if that is anything to do with it.
\par 
\par Over the past four weeks I have been very confident about the future regarding foot and mouth.  With the sun shining again and the animals about \endash 
 it seems as if nothing bad has happened here.  But you know that for some people involved in the crisis, the future will never be that easy or simple and I do feel sympathy for them.  For me, it seems possible to be able to move on now after the 
crisis and it has been good to see the sheep and cows about, and }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 has even seen a couple of birds of prey!  We are not sure what they were, but think one might have been a Merlin, which was mentioned in a previous \lquote Watchtree Newsletter\rquote  as being seen on site.  The article called \lquote 
Record tourism figures for county\rquote  was encouraging and shows that Cumbria may be starting to recover after the Foot and Mouth crisis.
\par I also found another article called \lquote Fears over bovine TB time bomb\rquote .  I think this is worrying and should definitely be taken seriously, as it would be devastating to farmers and everyone in the county!
\par In the past fortnight it has also been my Mam\rquote s birthday. She was really looking forward to spending some time out here and we went to Bowness for the afternoon with }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
.  Once again, you realise how lovely it is out here and how much it should be appreciated.
\par Overall in my opinion the situation in Cumbria over the past year has definitely improved and will hopefully continue to do so!
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4791720 
\par 24}{\b\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\insrsid4791720  March \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks 
\par }{\insrsid4791720 These past four weeks have been rather strange and worrying!  First of all, there was the death of Simon Harris, a man from the village, who you would regularly see walking dogs and looking at the horses.  Despite what mo
st of the papers have said about him, to me he was always polite and possibly just a bit shy.  I have enclosed an article about him that was in the paper shortly after his death.  The headline is not very nice but the article does include some of the best
 
comments about Simon.  I was quite shocked by the whole thing and think it could definitely have been handled better by the papers.  The people in the village could also have been a bit more respectful, I do not think it was their place to comment in the 
way that they did.
\par Secondly the whole issue of war with Iraq is a worrying subject.  Neither }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\insrsid4791720  or I agree with what is being done and how it is being carried out!  It is a particularly worrying time for }{\insrsid13315664 [fiance]
}{\insrsid4791720 \rquote s Aunty, as her husband lives in Kuwai
t, with the rest of his family.  She came to England, where she is originally from with her two children during the last Gulf war. She knows all too well what the danger are and what is involved!
\par It is a very worrying subject where you feel totally helples
s and at the same time cannot get away from it!  However, life still carries on, as harsh as it may be!  I thought of this when looking at the past diaries I have written and how many have accumulated!  It is strange how quickly time goes by and how peopl
e are just expected to cope and carry on.  I thought, in particular, of the people worst affected by the foot and mouth crisis; how helpless they must have felt, and how they coped!  Life can be a funny thing!
\par Looking back, I think this project has been ver
y worth while and think it is great that they will be archived for the future.  Writing these diaries seems to have become part of my routine now, and I think it will definitely be strange when I no longer have to write them!
\par 
\par I have found quite a few newspaper articles over the past four weeks. \'93Donella rebuilds the Cumberland Show\'94
 was encouraging about the future of Cumbria after the foot and mouth crisis, however there are still worrying issues arising, such as in the articles of \lquote MP calls for vaccination to keep F&M under control\'94; and, \'93From Uruguay with a threat
\'94, which highlight issues of important to the farming industry.
\par I have also been very busy over the past few weeks, as my second assignment was due for my university work, which was quite hecti
c!  I have had a break for the past couple of days as I have not been very well, a bad cough, sore throat and stomach and a stuffy nose!  I haven\rquote t done too badly over the winter months with illnesses, so I can\rquote 
t really complain!  Lastly our water hasn\rquote t been of the best quality lately!  On occasions it is white and fizzes, not the most appetizing!!  
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s5\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i0\f0\fs24\insrsid4791720 21}{\i0\f0\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{
\i0\f0\fs24\insrsid4791720  April  Writing  up after 4 weeks
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 These past 4 weeks have just se
em to fly by!  Quite a few good things have happened and even though I am feeling quite tired, I have had a good month!
\par Firstly }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 , }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I have finally go t a small space of our own!  We have got an allotment about 8 miles away and it is surroun
ded by horses and fields.  It belongs to a man who lives there and owns all the land roundabout, but unfortunately he is no longer well enough to work the land, so has let us have it!  It will need a lot of work but will be good for us!  So far we have go
t potatoes, raspberries and rhubarb growing!  }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  even helps to dig! Even though we live in the country, on our own block it is not always that easy to get any peace!
\par We have also had the opportunity to join the \lquote Cumbria Wildlife Trust\rquote .  A leaflet came t
hrough our door and we thought it would be brilliant as we would be kept up-to-date with all the latest goings on in Cumbria; learn a lot more about the wildlife and also possibly get the chance to do some voluntary work!  }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]
}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I are really interes
ted and think it is great.  We get sent though a certain number of magazines every year and every month we send a small donation so we feel like we are helping a little bit as well!  The article which I found in one of the magazines id enclosed on the nex
t page!
\par The other thing which has made my month is knowing that we are going to Hawkshead again!  My Mam, }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 , }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 and I are going for a short break, just 3 nights for my birthday!  We have got it all booked and are really looking forward to it!  It was great last time especially for }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 !  I just hope she doesn\rquote 
t get stuck under the bed in the caravan this time, as she is a bit bigger now than she was then!
\par This past week I have also been in touch with my Dad in South Africa as it was his birthday. 
It turns out that he may be passing through Carlisle for a couple of days at the end of next week. It would be lovely to see him again and I think he will love Great Orton and our allotment.  I think he has always liked the thought of living in the countr
y
 and would love to retire to somewhere nice and quiet!  Things will also have improved and we have grown up a bit since he was last here, about 3 years ago!  It should be good!  It is funny that after living in South Africa for so long, he is still drawn 
to the lifestyle in Cumbria!
\par Lastly, I have made a note of the final meeting for the foot and mouth diaries and hope to be there!  I bet it passes really quickly now and will be over before I know it!  How strange! 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 28}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  April \endash  4}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  May 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Monday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Got 3 articles from Cumberland news, April 25}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{
\fs24\insrsid4791720  2003 \'93Breeders hit out discrimination\'94, \'93FMD burial site celebrates new life\'94 and my favourite \'93its a dog\rquote s life for Rosie the lamb\'94
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Saw C
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Friday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Noticed the park is coming on a bit better for the chi
ldren. It was mentioned in the Orton Parish \endash  awarded \'a325, 000 to reference, drain, level and re-seed. New play equipment will follow.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Saturday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
Some of the children were allowed to attend meetings to discuss it. Good to involve children & about time too! At least children will be able to play football.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 5}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  \endash  11}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  May
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
Working really hard, have to get assignment posted off tomorrow night before we go away on Thursday. Hectic!
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Wednesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Service held at Watchtree \endash  unable to go but think it was a very
 good idea. Newspaper article enclosed was written before the service.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Thursday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Away to Hawskhead! Exciting!
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Friday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 My birthday! Had a lovely day \endash 
 went shopping in the morning, to forest in the afternoon and for a meal at night. Lovely!
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Sunday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
Back from holiday already! It was lovely! Everyone was so friendly or perhaps we just noticed it more there.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 12}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  \endash  18}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  May
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Tuesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  at doctors \endash 
 not very well, he has got a viral infection as well as fluid behind his ears. Told to just take it easy!
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Wednesday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
I have been sent info to chose courses for Open University that I would like to do next year and in the future. Am going to take the \'93Environmental Studies\'94 route, hopefully leading to \'93Diploma in Environment and Development\'94 and possibly f
urther to BA/BSc in Environmental Studies. I did like archaeology but think what I am doing is a lot more relevant to the future, Foot and Mouth and Watchtree made me realise that.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 Friday
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid4791720 Got Watchtree newsletter this week, I will enclose it this time as i
t covers quite a few areas and has a bit of information. There is information about the service held, awards that have been won and also new wildlife which are now present on the site \endash  Lapwings, Oystercatchers and Ringed Plovers.  
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid4791720 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid4791720 19}{\f0\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\f0\insrsid4791720  \endash  25
}{\f0\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\f0\insrsid4791720  May 2003
\par Tuesday
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid4791720 Dad has come to visit for a couple of days from South Africa. Nice surprise, enjoyed seeing him. Dad asking about FMD crisis (he saw it on TV over there) and how close it was. I think he was quite shocked!
\par }{\f0\insrsid4791720 Thursday
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid4791720 I was surprised that even though South Africa is so different he would still like to live somewhere in this country. Makes you think again how lucky you are and what you take for granted!
\par }{\f0\insrsid4791720 Saturday
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 Article from Cumberland News \endash  May 23 \endash  \'93Reward for post \endash 
 foot and mouth achievements\'94.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 25}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  May \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks
\par }\pard \ql \fi720\li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 
Every time I come to write these diaries I look back over the past four weeks and notice they are becoming more and more busy, the past couple of weeks have been no exception! It is already nearly half way through the year, I can\rquote t believe it!

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid4791720 \tab 
Over the past 4 weeks, I have been on holiday, turned 22 and my dad had popped over from South Africa for a few days! Hectic but good! Firstly, Hawkshead was lovely again! I wouldn\rquote t say anything different \endash  it was great! We all had
 a lovely time and I had a really good birthday! When you are at home in Great Orton you forget how much is really out there in Cumbria to do and see! We definitely think we should take advantage of it more often.
\par \tab Shortly after we arrived back from Hawkshead, my dad popped up to Carlisle for a couple of days. It was a lovely surprise and it was good to see him! He absolutely loves it where we are and thinks we are very lucky \endash 
 even though South Africa is so different, he still thinks it is lovely out here,
 looking out onto fields. This did make me realise how lucky we are, despite what happened due to foot and mouth. Inevitably, sometimes we do take it for granted! My dad remembered watching about the foot and mouth crisis in South Africa but did not reali
se exactly how close it was! I think he was quite shocked!
\par \tab Foot and mouth has definitely made me more aware of my surroundings and how everything works. I have definitely noticed this when I have been doing my studying for Open University. I am now at the 
point where I can chose my courses next year and therefore which path I am going to take. I have decided to take courses leading to a Diploma in Environment and Development and if everything goes to plan for an Environmental Studies degree. I am really en
joying what I am doing at the minute, and think it is definitely useful and relevant for the future. I did enjoy studying Archaeology but think the environment and related issues are more important at the present and in the future.
\par \tab On the 7}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 May there was a memorial service at Watchtree to mark a two year anniversary from when the last animal was buried at the site. I think this was a good idea and it is appropriate to remember the animals that were killed. I was unable to attend the service
 
but have managed to get a newspaper article about it and it was also mentioned in the Watchtree Newsletter. I have included this newsletter in with these diaries at it contains quite a bit of information on a few different aspects, I think it is good abou
t the wildlife which is emerging on the site.
\par \tab The park or play area for children is also coming on fairly well, at last! It has finally been reseeded as well as levelled, it looks better! I have also included 4 newspaper articles from the Cumberland news, with my favourite being \'93
Rosie the lamb\'94. I have put this article in as I thought it was lovely.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 
\par 22}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  June 2004 \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 How strange it seems that all this is coming to an end, and really how quickly time has passed.  In my situation, I would say that time has healed a few aspects of the foot and mouth crisis and things don\rquote 
t seem so bad 18 months on!
\par I enjoyed the foot and mouth evening and learnt a lot from it about other people\rquote s views and experiences. I enjoyed it a lot more than I 
thought I would and thought that the main themes found during the research were ones which I would have agreed with! One thing which was said which has made me think was the comment that these diaries would be our type of memorial. I had never once though
t of this research in that sort of way, but the more I think about it, the more I agree and like the idea!  It definitely has been worthwhile being able to contribute to something especially if it may be able to help in some way in the future!
\par When compared to the article that I found in the Cumberland News about a man\rquote 
s memorial to the animals that he lost during foot and mouth I definitely think ours is more fitting and will probably do some good!  I understand  everyone has the right to express their view
s in their own way but to me this was too loud and too inappropriate!  However each to their own and at the end of the day at least people are trying to remember in a good way as opposed to \lquote sweeping it under the carpet\rquote !
\par The week of the foot and mouth eve
ning we were without a car and noticed how much we relied on it and took it for granted, especially out here as there is a very limited bus service!  Everything is sorted out now and we are back to normal with a newer little car!  Thank you very much C}{
\fs24\insrsid10423486  }{\fs24\insrsid4791720  for the lift there and back!
\par In general the past few months just seem to have flown by and in particular the past couple of weeks!  I don\rquote t seem to have time to fit everything in, and am trying to get my assignments done on time! It turns out to be quite a b
it more difficult than I thought!  It is hard work but will definitely be worth it in th end \endash  over the past 6 months even I have learnt so much!
\par The next special occasion which is coming up is }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 \rquote s birthday 21}{\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 st}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  July! We are thinking of going back t
o Hawkshead again for a few days! We really like it there and I\rquote m sure will return again and again!  It just shows you that you don\rquote t need to leave Cumbria to have a good holiday!
\par Well, here we are at the end!  It just makes me wonder what life will be like in 18 months from now!  Will things be any different?  They probably will be in some ways and hopefully will be for the best!
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720 20}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid4791720 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid4791720  July \endash  Writing up after 4 weeks
\par }{\fs24\insrsid4791720 It does seem very strange
 to be sitting down to write my last lot of diaries. It feels good to have completed something as worthwhile as this!  As well as it hopefully doing some good in the future concerning foot and mouth crisis or any other similar situation, I also find it ha
s helped me to become a bit more confident and aware of things around me.  I remember back to when I attended my first meeting and how nervous I was!  I think I can handle things like that a bit better now!
\par We have just got back from holiday!  We had a lovely time and did so much!  We went walking with }{\fs24\insrsid5072385 [dog]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720 
 to many places and they are all free!  It just shows you what a good holiday you can have in Cumbria on a cheap budget!  You don\rquote t need much else!  The only disappointing thing is that some of the places }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{
\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I had been to in the past are now closed as they have been sold.  This has not yet happened to Talkin Tarn and I definitely think it should be given to the Cumbria Wildlife Trust as people would still have access to it.
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13315664 [fiance]}{\fs24\insrsid4791720  and I both agree that the countryside is recovering and it is great to be able to wander about again.
\par I have collected a few more articles from the Cumberland News related to Foot and Mouth. It is good to see breeders doing well again and people getting back into the swing of things!
\par I would just like to thank everyone involved for involving me in this project and I wish them all the best in the future!
\par }}