{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch1\stshfhich1\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f46\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f49\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f50\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f52\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f53\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{
\s4\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{
\s5\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 5;}{
\s6\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 6;}{
\s7\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 7;}{
\s8\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel7\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 8;}{
\s9\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel8\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 9;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqr\tx279\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\cf6\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext17 Body Text 2;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqr\tx279\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs33\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqr\tx279\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text 3;}{\*\cs20 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}{\s22\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext22 \ssemihidden footnote text;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid7806699\rsid7821953\rsid8531689\rsid9843489\rsid10311400\rsid10508068\rsid13256853\rsid14252424\rsid14439666\rsid15811700}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author ..}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min39}{\printim\yr2002\mo12\dy4\hr13\min57}{\version8}{\edmins7}{\nofpages8}{\nofwords3113}{\nofchars17747}{\*\company  }
{\nofcharsws20819}{\vern16391}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1797\margr1797 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0
\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\bdrrlswsix\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot7821953 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid9843489 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid9843489 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid9843489 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid9843489 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid7821953 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\f0\insrsid14252424 Lancaster University}{\f0\insrsid7821953 
\par Diary ID:       PM27}{\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs20\insrsid7821953 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs20\insrsid7806699 8}}}{\cs20\insrsid7821953 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid7821953 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid7821953 
\par Information about diarist
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 Date of birth: 1951
\par Gender: F
\par Occupation: Group 3}{\cs21\f0\fs24\super\insrsid7821953 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\noproof\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs21\f0\super\insrsid7821953 \chftn }{
\f0\insrsid7821953  }{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 Group 1 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 Group 2 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 Group 3 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 Group 5 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid7821953 Group 6 }{\f0\insrsid7821953 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.
\par }}}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par Week 1 (04/02/02)
\par Different week enjoyed haggling Margaret Beck}{\f0\fs24\insrsid13256853 e}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 tt and talking to other people who were still experiencing problems caused by FMD enjoyed probably isn\rquote 
t the right word probably satisfaction that at least someone listened but I suppose I am a bit cynical now because does anyone in authority really listen why should they now the have not all the time.Wonder where the business will be this time next year a
t least we have to just wait and see what happens with rules and regulations all we can do is keep going for now.
\par Nice re reading the notes sent to us through FMD 
\par 
\par Week 2
\par I suppose that talking over my separation with the solicitor h
as not helped how I have felt this week I worry about the financial aspects especially the way the business is.  I feel I have wanted to just be awkward about things and even though I know I am just being bloody-minded I still carry on. Having a day away 
on my own was good just being somewhere different in amongst people I do not know.
\par 
\par When I read this I feel very selfish as talking to F}{\f0\fs24\insrsid13256853  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 about the loss of her son has destroyed the person she was she can never really recover from that but time will help mos
t of my worries either personally with the divorce then I can move on and no where I am money wise and if the business does not recover decide what to do then with the rest of my life.  I have been so argumentative this week and just want to say the oppos
i
te to everyone else even though I know I am doing it. Went to the vets with my cat and he did not charge me as he said I had always been helpful to him that was nice. Going for lunch with my sisters next week and looking forward to it, as it will be a dif
ferent environment I need that sometimes just to get away.
\par 
\par Week 3
\par Not a lot work wise only the new company the others do not seem to think it will have much effect on us but I have my doubts only time will tell. Enjoyed the outings and speaking to differen
t people. I do surprise myself sometimes wondering how I coped for 29 years doing all I did now I do not do half the work in the house and garden but I still fill in all my days. Friend bought a different house she has realised that time is passing by and
 decided to move and enjoy life now not plan for years ahead I know exactly what she means
\par 
\par Week 4
\par Busy at work with all administration for end month Fiona who was a cleaner upstairs who we took on in January is coming along well I do like showing people ho
w we tick over Margaret called in to do some computer work nice to see her again usually just chat on the phone. The new company reared its head with the stock movements but we will just have to sit back and wait not a lot else we can do I think some of t
he spirit we had for the last 9 years has gone out of us all can\rquote t just be the effects of last year? Trying to stop smoking I mean }{\f0\fs24\ul\insrsid7821953 trying. }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 Even though I don\rquote 
t get on with my nephew it was sad to hear that they had lost the baby my sister was upset cause she
 had similar problems asked her to come and stay for a night out hope she does it will be good for both of us. My friend deciding to move to town is nice she says herself that she was to set in her ways and is going to enjoy life she can afford to I wonde
r when all my financial problems will be sorted and the divorce so I can move on most of the time I forget about it all then it rears it\rquote s ugly head and it is all so real again
\par 
\par The news pictures brought a lot of memories back of last year and the scare in 
Yorkshire as everyone says even if it was would we know no one has faith in the powers that be as they have been led up the garden path time and again Saw one of the researches outside the library she was doing the vet\rquote 
s etc would have loved to be a fly on the wall for that one!!!! 
\par 
\par Week 5
\par Quieter week all round at work. Nice to have a night out with my sisters we have never done that for years I think we are all making an effort for each other which is really nice. Had a frustrating week with the computer
s not working properly but ok now. Managed at long last to reconcile work bank statement after hours of being puzzled. Some lovely sunny days and it was lovely to  be walking on the fells again
\par Worried sometimes how the business is really doing when it is so quiet but the accounts are fine at the moment.
\par 
\par Week 6
\par Just a normal week like it has been lately the no smoking is going very well into my second week
\par With my cat going missing I feel down it is funny how quickly you become attached}{\f0\fs24\insrsid13256853 .}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  I only hope he tur
ns up again it was awful him not being about on Sunday night. Business is about the same slow but moderate people soon forget recent hardships and are back to asking for every discount they can get
\par Spoke to the new A.I. company people they may be new as a company but we have known the people a long time so it was nice to discuss things even though they are direct competition because we have a common enemy GENUS.
\par 
\par Week 7 (18/03/02)
\par What an awful week }{\f0\fs24\insrsid13256853 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  going missing was terrible I think I am more attache
d than normal because he is with me all the time at home or at work it is lovely to have him back nibbling toes!!!! Work has been a bit pathetic this week with little business.
\par 
\par Week 8
\par Nice week }{\f0\fs24\insrsid13256853 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  settled back to normal routine and as yet has not wande
red off again but is a real hunter now caught mice and a rabbit. Nice to have visitors and get out walking and have a good laugh and a nice meal. Work is very quiet not a lot doing at all. It was good to see }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 AH}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  this week but a bit shocked at how he looks somehow he has lost the sparkle he had and confidence.
\par 
\par Week 10 (08/04/02)
\par Bit of a mundane week work very quiet one or two new people called up now they are restocked but still very slow. Not a lot doing at home either . Been for some nice walks as the weather has been lovely
\par 
\par Week 11
\par Had a good week I think because I was physically and mentally stretched it was good to see enthusiasm in other people for all sorts of reasons moving house, new job ,new venture I suppose it does ru
b off on you when you see positive feelings from other people I have felt very negative lately. Work is still very slow but we are still making a living I suppose at the moment I am not worrying about money like I was Still not smoking nearly 6 weeks and 
\'a3150 richer but only time will tell as some people start again after years.
\par 
\par Week 12
\par Funny week not a lot happening at work very quiet nice to have A}{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 start work with us it brings different crack into the place.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [friends]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
 up for the weekend .Went for a walk in lakes very well I think we were all shattered by the end and needed the rest on Sunday. Still not smoking but feel the weight going on now even though I am not eating anymore except PEAR DROPS by the ton!!!!!!!!! 

\par 
\par Week 13
\par I have felt so rotten all wee
k the good news someone told me was it last for up to 2 weeks at least my nose feels better but the cough is awful. Work has been just the same still up and down but mostly finished by dinner time. Which has been a god send this week.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week 14
\par Feel a bit
 better this week but still coughing. Decided to do something about my weight joined weight management ( the fat club) need to loose 2 stone here goes it was ok and it was nice talking to different people all with the same problems weight. Determined to t
ry any way. Still not smoking!!!!!!!!
\par Work only busy cause end month . Made hanging baskets for friend and demolished her garden, she is having it landscaped.
\par 
\par 
\par Week 15
\par Work much the same spoke to M}{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 and got new updates on computer which I like doing. Really
 enjoyed this week went to Nottingham for the weekend went to a concert at Birmingham which was good as there were a lot of us. Went for a look round the shops during day sat in garden afternoon lovely day. Simon going off to Australia so had night out Sa
turday lovely meal home not to late. Probably put the 3 pounds I lost on Tuesday back on and more with this week end but it was good will try again!!!!!!!
\par 
\par Week 16 (20/05/02)
\par Quiet week at work settling in to new routines at home it takes adjusting to moving yet again but at least it gives me some security and allows me to get my finances sorted.  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
 settled well which is good
\par Still not smoking!!!!! Put on 1.5llbs which was not bad considering
\par 
\par Week 17 (27/05/02)
\par No car most of the week  in for repair . Still very quiet at work was out and sold some semen which is always a nice feeling. Lost 6 pounds  I felt really tired by Sunday the weather is crap so that doesn\rquote t help.
\par 
\par Week 18
\par Got new car same as last but I am keeping this one for a while. Ordered mugs for our tenth year of business time just goes by without realising. Mam\rquote 
s birthday we all went out for a meal at dinner time which mam and dad loved. Been on a few walks and still keeping the weight off never thought I would enjoy going to such a thing but the people are all in the same boat fat!!!!! Or were!!!! Went to see }
{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [friend]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 . Wrote to solicitor to get things moving it gets me down when I think abut it.
\par 
\par Week 19
\par Off two days this week did house work etc. Not a lot going on busy decorating at home. Work very quiet after month end still only working part days. Trying to get as much exercise as I can but the weather is awful.
\par Had a few hours in Carlisle for a change which was nice trailing the shops. Rang Solicitor for appointment not till 1st July.
\par 
\par Week 20
\par I just want this week and next over so time can move on trying to keep busy at home but difficult at work when it is so quiet.
\par 
\par Week 21
\par Well I survived the week thought it was awful but it is good to have friends and family to talk to. When I thought things were bad }{\f0\fs24\insrsid8531689 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  goes and does a walk about looked all over no sign put posters up 

\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [friends]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  here for the weekend so had a few nights out good time }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [he]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  helped board attic. Really miss }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10311400 [cat]}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  so does the cat across the way she keeps looking  for him and everybody keeps asking about him if only he realised. Still loosing weight and not smoking although I do not know how with the stress I have felt lately.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week 24
\par Really fed up and so near to tears all week saw solicitor about finical matters which worries me about the long term future hopefully at least this can get sorted and I can move on it just seems unfair that because the law has changed for women it also ha
s for men so that I have to part with half the value of my interests in the business and my pension. At least f& m did some good because the business is not worth what it was.
\par Emotions run so high I do not know how people cope when children are involved as
 well. Work ok but just seemed fed up with every thing and can not get any enthusiasm this week. Mam got an enormous phone bill to do with a mistake on the Internet so sorted that out. }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068 M}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
y sister phoned to apologise. Wish I could just stop wanting to cry fo
r nothing. At least with the garden being done it has distracted me to try and stop feeling sorry for myself. Still not smoking. Still loosing weight 10half pounds to go. Looking forwarded to holidays 10 august I need it. We discussed a pay rise and decid
ed we should have a small one
\par 
\par MAFF inspection 19/07 usual routine even though no one has been here for nearly eighteen months David (vet) and MAFF discussed F& M again and what they would have done MAFF thought they had done well!!! Did not disillusion him
 am sure a lot more people than me will.
\par 
\par Week 25
\par Still feeling very weepy and worrying about everything I know I am lucky to have somewhere to stay to get back on my feet but it does not look very good finically for me at the moment because of the busines
s and my pension. Off two days this week so enjoyed a few walks still lost weight Work just the same mostly quiet and finished by dinner time.
\par 
\par Week 26
\par This week has been a lot better as I am so looking forward to my hols and just getting away and stop worrying about everything I have not been sleeping to well for the last few weeks and feel totally exhausted.
\par Got everything up to date at work and bills out. Sales are still going well at it looks like we will do a lot better than expected but most of that i
s down to reduced costs i.e. staff and cars. A lot of farmers commenting on the closure of PFK auction at Penrith as they will have to travel to either Carlisle or Cockermouth. Milk prices that are so low are also getting farmers down and making them vary
 about buying anything, which results in business like ours also being affected.  Never mind hols and Austria here I come!!!!!!
\par 
\par Week 27
\par holidays all week 12/08to18/08
\par 
\par Week 28 
\par holidays all week 12/08to18/08
\par 
\par Week 29
\par Back at work after a lovely holiday it has done me the world of good to just forget for a while. Busy catching up on all the bits and pieces and messages left at least I feel useful keeping busy again. Work has been about the same business wise no surpris
es to come back to. Saw solicitor at end of week that really upsets me again just got to get past this then I can get on with the future.
\par 
\par Week 30
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  was knocked down and killed 31/08 I miss him so much buried him at work in the orchard the house feels s
o empty. Back at work after a lovely holiday it has done me the world of good to just forget for a while. Busy doing all the odd bits for a few days but nothing drastic happened very quiet. Joined step classes to see if I can shift last 7 pounds.  Back to
 the real world again with all the problems of solicitors etc. but nothing is as bad as loosing }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068 [cat]}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
 he was only a cat but so many people loved him they keep coming and saying so even people I have never seen before he just wandered so far and made friends along the way.
\par 
\par Week 31
\par Step classes ok but really shattered after it was nice to get out and meet new people if nothing else the dark nights are awful need to find something else to do with all this extra time I now have. Work has improved a little and s
ales are still doing well we would rather maintain sales which are the most profit to the business than run around after everyone for nothing. Farmers have short memories they are back moaning about most things that affects them but have not a clue about 
people like us I do not think they even care as long as they are alright I most be getting very cynical. Swimming twice a week .
\par 
\par Week 32
\par Out selling this week down west Cumbria, really had a good time good crack from everyone. Work still the same it does n
ot seem to alter day by day like it used to the days mingle into weeks at present as it used to feel more rewarding and interesting at least I can now do different things such as delivering and selling which helps.
\par 
\par Week 33
\par Had friends to stay did a bit of walking and had a meal out which was really nice. My sister has decided to start swimming again. We all did mums kitchen stripping it ready for re fit it was nice all being together and having a laugh.
\par 
\par Week 34
\par Glenys got a great order for 200}{\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 straws for the next 3 years ( wonder what we will be doing in 3 years!)  Busy getting things ready for end month where has this year gone.
\par 
\par Week 35  (07/10/02)
\par Sales again but not much luck just a small order. Delivered semen that had been quarantined these people us
ed to use us for inseminations but now do their own as long as they support us with semen sales which a lot will they will be just as good for the business profit.
\par 
\par Week 36
\par So quiet this week not a lot happening anywhere just chugging along. Out walking a couple of days. Met up with family.
\par 
\par Week 37
\par Solicitors again looks like I loose out on most things but I just want it all sorted now have changed my name by deed poll back to maiden name }{\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068 it}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  will take some
 time to get used to it after 30 years it is like getting a new identity. Work a bit busier ministry inspection ok. Still yo-yoing with this 5 pounds I still need to loose but the crack is good at the club.
\par 
\par Week 38
\par Work a bit hectic for a change this week
 because the computer went wrong and I had to sort all problems which was good as it filled in the day. Weather chronic  so not getting any exercise so I have joined a gym !!!!! should be interesting at least they are not all in designer gear!!!!! Yet tho
ught it got dark a few weeks ago but dark very early so it is nice to be finished early in the day. To get some daylight.
\par 
\par Week 39
\par Another month gone now it is all Christmas talk but my 50}{\f0\fs24\super\insrsid7821953 th}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953  birthday comes first I never thought that 10 years ago when we sta
rted Insem and being sacked by Genus on 17/11  we would be as we are now. To go from a 3 man team up to 7 then nearly back again the only thing about all this is we are still making a living and we are still here mostly because we have adapted and watched
 our costs. Really looking forward to next Friday flying off to the sun.  Enjoying the gym strange though it might seem I never thought I would 
\par Still 5 pounds to go but not worrying cause going to enjoy my hols.  
\par 
\par Week 42
\par Back at work again after nice holiday and lovely 50}{\f0\fs24\super\insrsid7821953 th}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
 birthday me 50 it is frightening people are so old at 50 or they use to be but I don not feel it. Busy catching up on all the little messages it was nice to feel busy again. Work has been a bit busier and sales are going ok. Rumours of
 problems at Nestles are circulating and by the local paper PF&K ARE GETTING RID OF Topline a semen company that has been draining their resources no surprise to us even though they have always claimed to be setting the worlds on fire.
\par Back to the Gym and weight club only put on a pound.
\par 
\par Week 43
\par Does not feel like I was on holiday now. Busy all week catching up for end month yet again. Called at mams as she was having problems with computer have been in the village much in the last year maybe twice it feel
s strange as I know the place so well but now avoid it in case I see my ex husband. Everyone getting ready for Christmas went to the lights switching on. Kath up for the weekend went to a charity dance, which was good fun bit too much to drink but ok next
 
day!!!!!!! Work is improving a bit more and I seem to be getting a bit more interest in things Nestles shock was that they dumped 200 milk farmers everyone is up in arms about it and wondering what else can go wrong in the industry? This will make farmers
 think twice about spending money ie semen sales again. Been out selling this week good crack but as yet no sales. Fingers crossed they will phone up.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 Week 44}{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
\par Not a lot happening this week been to gym a few times  looking forward to going to york next week. }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 Called at }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 mam's}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
 to help with computer did a it of work towards year end got a few orders this week. Back to solicitors yet again. On }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 Saturday}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
 saw my furniture advertised for sale in the papers that hurt a lot but }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 I}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953  have to be realistic also!!!!
\par 
\par Week 45
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 Thank god we are going to york as i have felt awful since seeing the advert in the paper. }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
Really lifted me up at York it is such a magical place at Christmas everyone rushing around buying presents }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 I}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953  have not got any to buy this year giving mostly money as 
they all know what they want to put it towards. Work plods on most days not busy at all some times }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 I}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953  wonder how }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 I}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
 managed before to clean a house wash iron etc do the garden and go to work full time pre foot and mouth!!!!!! I suppose the more you have to d
o you just get on with it. Called at my sisters for coffee and catch up. Saw Jen in Penrith she will call round in new year. Decided to give ourselves a bonus for Christmas which will help to pay solicitors bills.   
\par 
\par Week 46
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 Lost weight this week but do n
ot know how operation on foot hopefully that will cure it at long last fingers crossed. Work busy again up 70 cows on last year for feb even though calls down by 10 sales about the same but hopefully we can have a decent march. F}{
\f0\fs24\insrsid10508068  }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 on holiday this week can not wait for mine on 12/03 sun here i come.}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
\par 
\par Week 47
\par Diet still same unable to get any }{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 exercise}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 . Work bit busier this week with all the new figures to get out. Got two orders for new bull. Went to Mam\rquote 
s for the afternoon called at my sisters it was nice to catch up.
\par 
\par Week 48
\par Funny week cause I have two days off had a good day on sales got three orders. This month has just flown even though it is still quiet at work
 trying to occupy myself in other ways. I have had a bad foot going to doctors. Weight still sticking but I am going to keep going still not smoking.
\par 
\par Week 49
\par A bit fed up this week as the doctor has said to keep off my foot as much as poss unable to walk anywhere or go to gym . Work ok end month done all. Met up with friends and had a meal out which was a lovely end to the week
\par 
\par 
\par Week 50
\par Foot still not much better going twice a week now. Work slow but a lot more cows than last year even though less calls. New figures out this week so sales will start again in earnest. Someone ran into my car no dint or anything but over \'a3900 in damage 
}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7806699 I}{\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953  do not think it was her day.
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqr\tx279\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\fs24\noproof0\insrsid7821953 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs24\insrsid7821953 
\par }}