{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 
page number;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{
\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid86702\rsid6443389\rsid10115024\rsid15297402\rsid15691629\rsid16611465}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min34}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr12\min4}{\version5}
{\edmins5}{\nofpages21}{\nofwords6045}{\nofchars34458}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws40423}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace0\dgvspace0\dghorigin0\dgvorigin0\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot15691629 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid15691629 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\insrsid15297402 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM40
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs18\insrsid15297402 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid6443389 21}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs18\insrsid15297402 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15297402 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid15297402 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 2}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 7}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}07/02/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid15297402 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid15297402 Date of birth: 1944
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid15297402 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid15297402 Occupation: Group 2}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid15297402 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs22\super\insrsid15297402 \chftn }{\insrsid15297402  }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Group 1 }{
\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Group 2 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Group 3 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 .
\par Group 4 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Group 5 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Group 6 }{\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid15297402 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}}}{\fs24\insrsid15297402 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria}{\b\insrsid15297402 {\*\xmlclose}
\par 
\par 
\par Can I start by asking how you think Foot & Mouth has affected you and your business?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid15297402 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15297402 
Well obviously being in a farming area with many of our customers who are either farmers or directly or indirectly involved with farming it became unavoidable, especially with, we were involved with it a lot, especially right from the beginning.  And um, 
I think probably at the beginning it was unbelievable to us really that it would get going so quickly.  Um, and then when it sank in that um, it wasn\rquote 
t something that was going to go away in five minutes, as it unfolded I think it was one of anger really of the mismanagement, the seeming mismanagement of the whole thing anyway.  I think that\rquote 
s probably the main thing and obviously sorrow for the people and the animals involved.  Um, because it obviously has had a very profound effect on the actual farming, farmers involved in it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Thinking back to when you first heard about the outbreak, did you worry about your business when you first heard about?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well not initially, not initially.  But I think after the first perhaps two or three weeks when it became quite
 obvious that it was an extremely serious outbreak obviously then um, we noticed quite quickly a tailing off in business, mainly of course because people were staying on their farms they didn\rquote 
t want to come out.  So really I suppose from towards the end of
 March I suppose we began to feel the effects of it.  And then April, April through to August quite seriously and it was at that time really that I then went through and did a sort of cash flow prognosis as to where I thought the year was going to be.  I 
d
id that right through till Christmas.  And um, anticipated on what we were down for the first month, if that continued in that sort of aim, how that would affect us for the whole year.  Um, and in actual fact it was very similar to what I thought it would
 be up until about July but then gradually um, trade improved.  So in fact when we got to Christmas um, trade had improved so much that we had almost alleviated a lot of the losses that we\rquote 
d had earlier in the year.  Um, we obviously had a much quieter time because there weren\rquote 
t so many visitors about.  But I think, indirectly having selling for instance Border Fine Arts figurines of farm stock,  many of them sort of limited edition things we then started getting people in who had lost their animals, had had
 compensation and were then wanting to buy something to sort of remind them of the animals they\rquote d lost, you see.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 That\rquote s interesting yes.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 So we would have like a Texel Tup and a {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Texel{\*\xmlclose} ewe and lamb and people would be buying these to remind them of stock they\rquote d lost.  Sometimes it might be somebody who\rquote 
d had perhaps several hundreds.  And in another situation it might have been a young person who\rquote d had perhaps one tup and half a dozen ewes.  So indirectly from quite an early stage we were getting people spending money because of the Foot & Mouth.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Right and did people actually say to you that was why they were buying them?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, yes, yes.  Um, yes so that was, and I think right from the start um my wife and I discussed it and said, \'93well look\'94 \'85\'85
 not from the start, from into it, when people were getting the compensation and you could see what the situation was.  Um, you know our feelings were, well either you know some of that\rquote 
s going to find its way into the business or people are gonna be really strapped for cash depending on how it affects our immediate area. Because it was probably quite late on that um, many of the farms round here were af
fected.  There were a few early on and then it was later on um, when they were affected.  So we were then thinking well you know either our Christmas trade is going to be all right, you know it was going to be very good, or it was gonna be lousy.  You kno
w we thought it would be one way or the other.  And as it actually happened it was very good, mmmm.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Right, right, how do you think last year went in terms of the business?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well in terms of business I think it will end up with being very similar to the previous year.  So we\rquote 
re exceptionally fortunate really.  And I think as I explained at the meeting um, you know we are a sort of long-established business we don't borrow any money.  Um so in actual fact even though I'd um forecast early on that we could be 
something like 30 to 40% down in out turnover, although we wouldn\rquote t have liked it financially it wouldn\rquote t have affected us disastrously because we\rquote 
d got reserves that we could um, call on.  Um, but I mean most certainly in the early, I would think really r
ight up until November we were obviously concerned as to what would happen.  And obviously um, you are affected emotionally by friends and customers who themselves are affected, you know, and I mean customers not directly affected, you know.  We actually 
had a customer come in during a \'85\'85 oh I don\rquote t know, possibly during August I suppose, and I mean, they were almost in tears which almost must us go into tears because they\rquote 
d just come across a farm that was being culled, they thought that would happen but they didn\rquote 
t know.  But um, they came across this car that was parked on the side of a little lane, they slowed down to ask the people in the car, sitting in the car what was happening.  And it turned out to be the farmer and his wife, who were just desolate
d in this car in tears you know.  And I mean that really affected me and a little bit now,  to be honest.  Um, you know when you sort of feel for those people and what they are going through.  So it\rquote 
s surprising how it does affect you and perhaps you don\rquote t think it does, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 I imagine that must have happened fairly often.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, yes, and you actually get \'85\'85 eventually when people came out you know you would get people who would come in who really just you know, they broke down and couldn\rquote t, you\rquote d try 
to console them but you know its very difficult.  So I think you know although personally we\rquote ve been extremely fortunate it certainly did affect us emotionally during the time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Mmmmm it must have been stressful\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well it was yes, yes.  As I say I think on the whole we always try to be positive about things and we were in a fortunate position that we could you know, although it looked like a negative situation, you know, you\rquote 
ve got to try and be positive about it, hadn\rquote t you, you know?  But no obviously we were very concerned about it.  But as it\rquote s happened its not been, it hasn\rquote t affected us as badly as it might have.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 You mentioned earlier about some assistance from the recovery fund?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 How did that process work?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well that I think was, we were probably circulated um, from Eden District Council.  I mean for the first couple of months, well for the first quarter we also got the business rates um, what\rquote 
s the word, relief I suppose you would call it, business rate relief because our turnover was some 30 \endash 
 40% down.  So we only actually got that for three months because when they sent for another form to see how you were doing you know, I mean, our turnover had sort of come up,  so that we were really beginning to be on 
a par with what it was, even though for that period, even though prior to that period we still hadn\rquote t recovered obviously.  So in all honesty we couldn\rquote t say that our business is still down, so we obviously didn\rquote 
t claim anymore of that.  But um, for the pe
riod involved, for the claiming through money from the recovery fund, well then you know running on we still were 30% down you see, which I think 25% was the trigger-off point for making a claim.  So um, initially we weren\rquote 
t going to but then there was a s
econd band of applications and we did fit the criteria so we decided that we would.  And um, you know we had a very helpful person from Business Link actually come out and we just went through what things we could do from the marketing grant side of it, w
hich I think was \'a36,000 and how we would spend that to help recover from the losses.  So we went through all that and did that.  And then of course there\rquote s the IT grant as well, and I mean we\rquote re not computerised at all, so um, we\rquote 
d gone through that as well.  So I mean, the help that we had from Business Link to do that was quite adequate in our experience there yeah, mmmmm.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Do you think it was an appropriate kind of response in terms of what they were offering?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well I think in many circumstances people felt, for instance we\rquote 
ve got friends who have got a guest house.  Now their business just disappeared all together.  So you know at one stage they would have been 90% down you see.  Now they\rquote ve got no income at all coming in, we\rquote d still got income coming in 
because of the local business, you know, and people still need birthday cards and the odd present, so we\rquote d actually got cash coming in.  A lot of businesses hadn\rquote 
t.  And I think a lot of people felt it would have been more appropriate to actually have had some compensation, cash recompense to help actually pay the bills that were needing to be paid.  Rather than this \'a3
6,000 which was not gonna be money in your hand, it was going to pay for services to get you back on the right track in the future.  And I th
ink we felt initially that because we were eligible we would apply to this.  But really and truly if the bulk of it was going to be going on advertising and the marketing and all this sort of thing we really thought it was money down the drain, to be hone
s
t, to some extent.  But I think it was probably after Lord Haskin came up here they changed it so that that marketing money could also be used for repairs and refurbishment and other things to do with making the property, you know with making the business
e
s better to face the coming trading period.  Now that I think obviously was a far better use of the money.  And so, I mean, we feel quite pleased to have taken advantage of that to give the shop a bit of a lift and a bit of a facelift.  And I think you kn
ow from the comments from people we\rquote ve had coming in since we\rquote ve done it, you know its given us a lift because its freshened everything up and we\rquote 
ve been able to look at various things and improve them.  And I think for the customers coming in its given them a lift, because you know, they think oh this is brighter.  So it think that\rquote s been a good use of the money.  If we\rquote 
d have spent several thousands of pounds on advertising and marketing it might have had some effect but I don\rquote t think it would have had the amount of response for the amount of money being spent, you know, mmm.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 How do you think the business community felt about the level of response?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 I mean, um, I haven\rquote t actually talked, actually asked many people whether they\rquote ve actually received anything, to be honest.  Um, I do know a couple of pubs that have and they\rquote 
ve obviously spent a lot of, you know they are obviously spending it on advertising, because one can see in the local press you know they are more evident whereas they wouldn\rquote t have adverti
sed before.  Um, and then the guest house that I referred to, they have done a certain amount of refurbishment and advertising and renewing and guest house sign and this sort of thing.  So I think where possible people are taking advantage of it, mmmm.  B
ut I think the general feeling probably still is that they would have appreciated \'a36,000 in their bank account to help off-set debts that they\rquote 
d had, especially in the um, in the guest house business rather than doing the things that they have done, mmmm.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 More broadly how do you think the local community changed during the events of last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well it became all consuming there is no doubt about it.  And even though you tried, I mean the topic of conversation was Foot & Mouth and the Ministry of Agricultur
e and their incompetence.  Um, and that really just took over our life as well.  And I think again as I mentioned before Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 I think did unbelievably well in their coverage of it and really gave a community service um with what they did.  Because
 every day um, you know you tuned in as early as you could to see what the latest outbreaks were.  Um, and its strange its affecting me now emotionally, its strange how, um I suppose its bringing back the feelings that you had at the time.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Yes, yes, do you want to stop for a? \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 You can otherwise you\rquote ll be wasting [tape stopped] \'85\'85.  Yes I think it\rquote 
s important you know as long as your getting the people which it sounds you are who have been very badly affected by it.  As I keep on saying, I think we\rquote ve been fortunate that we weren\rquote 
t affected anywhere near as much as many people.  But as I think we\rquote ve just seen I think we have been affected more than we think probably.  And it was all-consuming there\rquote s no two ways about it, um you know we would put the radi
o on in the morning and listen and you would listen to see how near it had got.  And I think one thing the wife and I said, was that thank God it\rquote 
s not an epidemic that affects humans.  Because the seemingly incompetent way that it was handled was just hor
rendous and had it been something that was affecting humans you know I just shudder to think what would have happened.  And we just said you know we hoped to God that nothing like that does come.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Did you have any confidence in any of the people managing the Foot & Mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well again we, there was so many stories coming.  No I think the main thing was that you couldn\rquote t seem to get the same answer from the so-called experts.  Um, everything, I mean the Minster of Agriculture um at the time just seem
ed so wet about it all but then on the other hand he was being guided by the Chief Vet, Jim Scuddermore.  And everything the Ministry of Agriculture said was really reflecting on the advice that he was being given from him.  And the Chief Vet seemed so in
transigent as to what should be done and what was going on.  And you\rquote d get the so called experts who couldn\rquote 
t seem to agree on anything which seemed unbelievable to me, because its not as if Foot & Mouth had just reared its head for the first time ever in the world.  Um, and I mean I went to a meeting in Penrith, I can\rquote 
t really remember when it was now, it was still raging, it was probably August time and it was a meeting called really to discuss vaccination.  And there was a couple of people there who were 
seemingly scientifically qualified to speak on this vaccination.  And they put up a very good case for it and they seemed to give evidence from world authorities on Foot & Mouth who said the vaccination shouldn\rquote 
t happen, should happen.  Um, but then you\rquote ll get somebody else spouting on the television whose another authority that said, we shouldn\rquote 
t have vaccinations.  But it certainly seemed to us that the NFU again had a very difficult part to play but they seemed from something, from some interviews and in
formation that we had to be the people that were standing out against vaccinations.  So you know perhaps the \'85\'85  And the farmers themselves I think were so confused by information and mis-information that they really couldn\rquote 
t make their minds up whether you should have vaccination or you shouldn\rquote 
t have vaccinations.  You know, and I think if people get, if you get this differing advice from so-called people that should know how on earth can you decide what should happen?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Has it affected your confidence in technology?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well yes, I mean, I think um, probably all through my life, I mean, I was actually involved in farming before we came here.  Again I managed a farm for 20 years and we\rquote ve been running this shop now for 16 years so you know I
\rquote m very involved with farming from that point of view and perhaps sometimes think of myself as a farmer rather than a shop keeper.  But over that time we\rquote ve been involved in nutrition because the boss who I had whose farm I ran was in the B
ritish Nutrition Foundation and we used to get a lot of involvement through him.  Um, and we\rquote ve seen dairy products being bad for you and then certain products being good for you.  We\rquote 
ve seen the BSE crisis, and CJD and as far as we can see it still hasn\rquote t been proven, it still has not been proven that CJD comes from BSE there is no proof.  Yet you have all the food scares that they are.  So really I\rquote 
ve got very little confidence in all these scientific things.  And I think I\rquote m very sceptical probably about research because I think that um, if you set out to prove something you can prove it.  I mean, I\rquote 
ve done this myself when I used to run the farm, I could prove a case for buying a new machine or I could prove a case for not buying the machine.  And I pers
onally think that in research generally very often people can keep research going because they just want to keep the funding going.  So I\rquote m rather sceptical about it all to be honest [laugh].
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402  [laugh] Do you remember the \rquote 67 outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 No, I\rquote ve got vague recollections as a child cause we lived in the country, um and I\rquote 
ve got vague recollections of Foot and Mouth outbreak then and animals, it would have been Foot & Mouth, and animals being actually buried in lime in big pits with lime in the area in which I lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Essex
{\*\xmlclose}.  But um, nothing of the \rquote 67 outbreak.  We had a big pig herd on the farm that I ran and swine fever was more of a worry than um, Foot & Mouth, so I\rquote ve got no recollections of the \rquote 67 outbreak.  Having brought the 
\rquote 67 outbreak up again I find it unbelievable that there were apparently recommendations from that outbreak and that they seemingly were just disregarded as to how it should be coped with.
\par 
\par I think really they were just running round in circles once it really got going.  And um, I shudder to think what would have happened had the Brigadier not come into {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}
Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and taken charge because um, things really got going once he got in control, you know.  He made decisions and did things.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 He seems to be a very popular figure within {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 
Yes because he was er, he had a human face, but he got things done you know, that was the thing.  This is I think what probably everybody found so frustrating that and it was just um, incredible how you had the animals lying around for all this time and 
then people would say, \'93well once they\rquote re dead the virus is stopped you know\'94.  And then on the other hand they\rquote ll tell us \'93well it could have been brought in on dead meat from another country\'94
.  So how do you square the two?  You know, it seemed that they would say, that people would say anything really that they thought might placate the situation really.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 There are lots of stories\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well you get all the conspiracy stories of course.  And again um, it was quite evident that there wasn\rquote t a proper plan in place to deal with it.  But then on the other hand you\rquote ve got seemingly stories where almost you
\rquote ve got first-hand experience of people who said, \'93well all this thing about the sleepers being ordered well ahead\'94.  And I think probably the Ministry of Agricu
lture probably admitting that sleepers had been ordered ahead.  Now if that was the case why wasn\rquote t there a better plan in place?  That\rquote 
s the other thing.  And the other thing which again I think came out of it was that I think I heard somewhere that sleepers are treated so that they don\rquote 
t burn on the railway tracks, yet they were buying sleepers to start fires you know that seemed a bit strange to me.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 I guess it must have been a strange situation for you with regards to your farming background\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, well I think so.  Yes, I mean, I\rquote 
m a reasonably sensitive person as well to be honest.  Um, you know and I mean if a stranger came in the shop and was very upset you know and told me a tale of woe.  Well then I would probably be emotionally affected myself as 
well because its another human being, you know.  And in actual fact I think um, I\rquote m going off your question a bit here but in actual fact I think there came a point when we felt that we\rquote 
d got to try and shut off from it a bit actually.  And in fact because it was all-consuming \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Was this a conscious decision?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 This was a conscious decision I think that we took and we do take in our lives generally that it might be perhaps hiding or escaping from a situation.  But I think you have to, you get to the point where you\rquote 
ve got to have self- preservation.  And instead of having Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 on almost constantly we would put it on first thing in the morning and just get the up-date of what had happened.  Um, and then we\rquote d perhaps have an up-date in the evening an
d leave it at that.  And I think that was a case of self-preservation I think really because we were feeling that it was just all-encompassing you were dealing with people every topic of conversation in the shop was the Foot & Mouth.  Um, so I think we co
nsciously did that and we do do it now.  I mean, for instance I think last night or the night before there was gonna be a programme on the television about what happened if smallpox was going \'85
.. if somebody had got the smallpox, its obviously to do with September 11}{\super\insrsid15297402 th}{\insrsid15297402 
  I suppose and you know if somebody got smallpox what would happen in the community if that happened. Now we took a conscious decision we don\rquote t wanna know to be perfectly honest.  I suppose its putting your head in the sand.  But um we tend to
 look at a lot of these things from a self-preservation point of view.  And although we feel they\rquote 
re caring people and I mean, I belong to The Rotary Club, which is a caring organisation and does all sorts of things within the community and within the worl
d really.  I mean, one thing the Rotary has done is been in the real forefront of eradicating polio from the world, you know billions of pounds have been put in to eradicating polio.  So you know we are caring people but I think also because we\rquote 
re sensitiv
e people you do have to have self-preservation so we bring that in.  But from the farming point of view, I mean having dealt, you know having had animals and dealt with animals and basically contrary to probably media and towns people to some extent, farm
ers are caring people, you know they\rquote ve got to be to do what they do.  And although they are breeding animals to be slaughtered um, it\rquote s quite different to have the animals slaughtered before they\rquote re ready sort of thing, isn\rquote 
t it you see.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Do you think the general public thought that of the farming community?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 The farming community?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Do you think they are perceived to be caring people?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Very difficult to say.  I mean, I think there\rquote s this general feeling that has been really feather-bedding of farmers, you don\rquote t actually hear that term so much now.  But in my time in farming you know in the \lquote 
60s this was very much heard feather-bedding of farmers and they are all driving round in their Rolls Royce\rquote s and Jaguars and all the rest of it, you know.  But there is
 a system in the country that was brought in, in theory to make sure that the country didn\rquote t starve.  And certainly anybody you know I mean, I was born at the end of the war so I didn\rquote 
t really know about the war.  Although there was a certain amount of rationing when I was a child but people, with the plentiful food that there is now, people don\rquote 
t realise that there was a shortage of food in this country.  And I think there could even be a shortage of food in the country again and that\rquote s why I think it is s
o disturbing um, to see how people or to hear how people think about farming generally.  Farming is tolerated I think in this country now.  Um, conservation is keen, all right.  Tourism is keen.  I think farming is tolerated.  All people want is cheap foo
d.  Um, they\rquote ll pay lip service to wanting to animal welfare but they still want cheap food.  And um, really they have probably got it, to be honest.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Going back to your strategy for self-preservation, did it work?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 I think it did yes, yes.  Um, it might ha
ve kept it in the background more perhaps you know.  Again I was surprised that it affected me emotionally this morning talking about it.  Um, but I mean obviously we have talked about it with people and friends and farming people so its not something tha
t we kept subdued.  But no I think it probably did, yeah I\rquote m sure it helped us and does help us generally in our life because that\rquote s what we\rquote 
re like we tend to do that.  Obviously we will face up to things and in helping people.  You know I\rquote ve actually got a brother who suffers from depression and has done, you know, his 46 and um, his single and we\rquote 
ve tried to help him as much as we can.  But there comes a point where you just can\rquote t help its down to the person and you can only be supportive you know we can only be supportive of him on the telephone.  In the past over the last 20 years we
\rquote ve tried to get medical help for him and all the rest of it, you know, we\rquote ve done as much as we can.  So I now felt my conscious, I suppose by saying, \'93we\rquote ve done all that i
n the past really all we can do now is listen and be supportive\'94 and I have to turn off from him.  Fortunately I\rquote ve got a wife who um, although funnily enough because his been going through a difficult period this last month or so, it\rquote 
s affecting her.  And I\rquote ve now come through the situation where I can listen and then turn off from him, whereas she will think about it more and feel so desperately sorry for him and it will begin to affect her.  So I\rquote 
ve now come back in and I\rquote m talking to him and perhaps not really listening and then trying to turn off.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 I guess that\rquote s one way of really coping with it.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Did you notice any changes in your own health or behaviour as a result of last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well yes, I mean, I think I do go through periods, not actual
ly of depression, but I mean I think in general life people get fed up and depressed about things and you become more irritable.  And certainly I think I probably I think my wife would say that I was definitely more irritable for many, many months last ye
ar, you know.  Um, because your under pressure.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Yeah of course yeah.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Um, and in actual fact I would have gone through a period like this in farming you know.   Where we\rquote d gone through a difficult period in farming where I would be irritable and probably very difficult to live with but because I
\rquote ve got an understanding wife you know you get through it.  And I think it\rquote s probably because of that you develop these um, these ways of dealing with it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Of coping \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yeah, of coping with it.  Um,  yeah.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Right.  Um, what to you was the worst thing about it, about last year?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well one thing that really brought it home to me was one morning I always go out for a walk first thing in the morning about {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 8}}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}8 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}.  Um, and I we
nt out one morning quite early in the outbreak and I went through a field of lambs and ewes and then there were cattle, walking by the side obviously, the footpath that was going by the side of them.  And then I came out onto the main road and there were 
three enormous cattle lorries rumbling by and these Snowie}{\cs22\super\insrsid15297402 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs22\super\insrsid15297402 \chftn }{\insrsid15297402  Transporting FMD culled livestock to burial sites}}}{\insrsid15297402 
 wagons with the covers over.  And it just sent a shiver through me, you know, it really just sent a shiver through my body.  And I mean, I didn\rquote t
 burst into tears or anything, but I mean I became, I really became quite emotional over it and then you really just, it was then getting to the point where we\rquote 
d got the Snowie wagons going through.  And even now if we see a Snowie wagon on the A66 you think to yourself God, a Snowy wagon and then I say to my wife, \'93well you know before Foot & Mouth snowy was transported all sorts of things\'94
.  But in our association Snowie Wagons are transporting dead animals.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Yeah I\rquote m sure that\rquote s the case for lots of people who see Snowie wagons.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yeah,  yeah.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Um, was there ever a point where last year you thought that maybe it would have been good to talk through some kind of counselling service\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Not personally because um, no I think that um, we tend very much to be self-sufficient you know.  And again because we\rquote 
ve got a good marriage and a good relationship and we talk about things well then with one another we would talk about things and I think in our particular situation that was sufficient.  I think many of the services and again Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} highlighted these services that there were these telephone lines set up for farmers to ring in and talk to them.  Of course there\rquote 
s always the Samaritans.  Um, and we knew people involved with that.  Um, so I think that was hopefully\'85.. hopefully, that fulfils the need of many people.  Whether it did or not I don\rquote t know, I suspect it didn\rquote t, it won\rquote 
t have you know fulfilled the need of everybody obviously but I hope it went a long way you know to doing that.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 OK.  Um, do you think any good came out of FMD?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes.  I think it showed the inter-dependence of the area with agriculture.  I think people know that anyway.  I mean we\rquote re quite evident.  I mean we know that we\rquote 
re in a farming community and our buying is reflected because of that.  And you know if, I suppose it\rquote s a bit like a coal mining community isn\rquote 
t it?  You know, if coal mining goes down, you know, pit closes then the community is severely affected.  Well if farming goes through a bad period um, then the whole community
 is affected, you know the whole business community is affected.  Um, and obviously we\rquote 
ve thought of this before Foot & Mouth you know when farming is not doing so well, well then that will be reflected in our business because many of our customers are inv
olved in farming.  So I think it highlights that, it highlights the inter-dependence of communities and businesses, and people.  In many respects I think it brings people closer together. But then later on I think it will have driven some farmers apart.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 That\rquote s interesting \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Because of the compensation.  And really at the end of the day I think it would seem to me that the farmers that actually lost their animals, although they went through a very traumatic period um, and it will have affected many of the
m very, very badly once they got their compensation then they could look forward to planning ahead.  Um, the farmers that didn\rquote 
t get it were living on a knife-edge and I would think are still probably, could even be more affected financially and emotionall
y because they were just living on a knife-edge.  And we would have customers who came in who when the outbreak had sort of seemingly stopped they eventually would have got a license to move animals and they would have sold stock, cattle for \'a3
300 each had it gone in the cull they would have got \'a3
1100 each.  And they were bitter you know they were bitter that they had to, that they were imprisoned on their farm, they had to pay all the costs of disinfectant themselves.  Um, they had to pay extra feeding costs themselves, they couldn\rquote 
t sell anything, and at the end of the day you know one person said that they \'85\'85..
\par 
\par END OF SIDE 1
\par 
\par So that, you know and there will be farmers like that who will look at their neighbours you know and their neighbours, I\rquote ve got a nicely spruced up farm, you know even new buildings, new fences, they\rquote re gonna have new animals.  They\rquote 
ve perhaps had a holiday, you know.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 So do you think overall FMD brought the community closer together or do you think it pushed it further apart?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 No I, well I\rquote 
ve no real direct experience to be honest.  My gut feeling is that it could in the end put it apart.  Because there is a feeling that many people have done OK out of it, not necessarily only the farmers you see there will be people in ancillary trades who
\rquote ve been clearing up and involved with Defra and will have earned a lot of money.  And I think,  to some extent it could have been divisive, mmm.  But that\rquote s just a gut feeling I\rquote ve not got any, you know at the moment I\rquote 
ve not really got any you know, direct um information about that.  But that\rquote s a feeling I think I\rquote ve got from conversations with people.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Did you notice any divisions between the business community and the farming community during the crisis?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, I mean I think definitely businesses that were severely affected were saying \'93well its all very good and fine for the farmers they\rquote re gonna get compensation we\rquote 
re not getting compensation for the tens of thousands pounds that we\rquote re losing.  So certainly yes definitely.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Say for example, the issue of the footpaths and access to the countryside?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Oh definitely, definitely yeah, um people felt that there were mixed messages coming forward you know, one minute the government is saying the countryside is open when undoubtedly the countryside wasn\rquote 
t open.  And you could understand that the farmers don\rquote t want people walking through their fields of animals.  Um, and I don\rquote t think it was opened earlier enough once you know, once Foot & Mouth had happened or once
 animals had been culled I think it, you know from everybody else\rquote 
s point of view, other than the farming community I think things could have been opened earlier.  But it is very, very difficult you can see even now, I mean its really only the last, since 
Christmas I suppose in January, that round here footpaths have been opened and still I wouldn\rquote t walk through a farm if there was a footpath going through the farm.  And I won\rquote 
t walk through a field with animals in still.  I went out probably pre-Christmas over to Howtown in the Lakes, you know on the edge of the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Lake District{\*\xmlclose} because I hadn\rquote 
t been up the hills at all you know for what 7, 8, 9 months and that was opened.  And it really felt quite wrong for me to be walking through these herdwick sheep.   I mean it was quite permissible um, but it felt wrong for me to be walking through them.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Right did you feel guilty about it?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, yes, I really felt guilty.  I did it because there were loads of other people walking through these sheep but I really felt guilty for doing it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Do you think things will ever get back to normal again?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well I think they will yes, I think they will.   Well in terms of going into the countryside again I think they will.  Um, farming I don\rquote t think will ever be the same again and its
 quite evident that um, the government will use this as a means to reducing stocking levels I think undoubtedly they will do this, you know, use this.  I mean, obviously there\rquote 
s already talk of you know putting more of the support money into sustainable fa
rming and all the rest of it.  You know and this will bring up the conspiracy theories again you know that um, that it was used to reduce the stock levels.  I honestly, I just cannot believe that anybody in the government in this country, any human being 
could do that, can\rquote t believe that they would but I\rquote ve got a horrid suspicion that it could be possible.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Have you?  Yeah.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 I don\rquote t want to believe it because I like to try and believe good in everybody really.  But um, I think I mentioned to you that I\rquote d like to get hold of this Private Eye article.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Sorry I meant to photocopy \'85\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, my wife says I shouldn\rquote t read it because it will just make me angry again.  But um, I think you know I would like to actually read it and just see what they unearthed about it all, but I haven\rquote t \'85\'85 I\rquote 
ve tried locally to get it, I should have actually written to Private Eye but I must admit I didn\rquote t.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Yeah.  Um, how do you feel now about the future, how confident do you feel about the future?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well I feel positive, you know I fe
el positive.  Obviously from a business point of view I feel positive about the future.  Um, having renovated the shop.  I keep saying, I keep thinking to myself should I feel guilty, you know little things just sometimes run through my mind, should I be 
feeling guilty that I perhaps profited from it in a way. Because I think eventually we would have done the floor in the shop you know.  From an actual business point of view, we would have paid for it and done it.  But in actual fact we\rquote 
ve taken advantage of it.  So in a way you could say we\rquote ve profited from Foot & Mouth, but I don\rquote t think I do feel guilty about that.  I mean, I\rquote ve looked at it from the point of view that um, you know we, in this business, we\rquote 
ve never had any hand-outs or um, subsidies or anything from the government for anything, we\rquote ve done it all with our own money.  This is available and I think we would be foolish not to take advantage of it, so that\rquote s the reason we\rquote 
ve done it.  So I think I\rquote ve sort of squared any sort of guilt that there might have been there that we\rquote ve profited from Foot & Mouth in that respect.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 OK.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 So I think I feel positive about the business future.  Um, there will al
ways be that worry because of our close link with farming, there will always be that background worry that if farming goes into the doldrums then that will affect our business.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Do you think that\rquote s perhaps more of a worry now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Yes, I think it is more of a
 worry because I think it is quite evident that um, farming is a very low priority in this country and people will have seen that, well there were millions of animals slaughtered, there were millions of animals slaughtered and there was no food shortage. 
 Um, people will see t hat and people will say, \'93well why the hell should we be subsidising these farmers, why should we have the so called mountains, if there are mountains?\'94  People don\rquote t realise I don\rquote 
t think on what a knife-edge food supply is.  I remember years back um, well in fact cereals, there was a cereal shortage back in the sort of \lquote 
60s.  And my boss actually did a sort of paper, the Oxford Farming Conference looking forward that there could be a serious shortage of cereals.  And in fact I think,
 and on the other hand it could go the other way.  I think it was estimated that if Russia increased their production by only 100 weight per acre of wheat, which is nothing in UK terms, there could be a glut of cereals in the, you know in the world.  That
\rquote 
s never happened but in turn you could get some disease to go through the cereals in this country and we could be dependent on importing all our food and it could so easily happen, it could so easily happen.  You know you could get some September 11th I t
hink would make people more uneasy about this sort of thing.  And um, I think because there isn\rquote t the shortage of food in this country people think there could never be but there could be [laugh].
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Right.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 And I think the government forgets that at their peril really you can\rquote t just suddenly turn on food it\rquote s a life cycle.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 I guess for a lot of people the link between production and purchasing food has gone, they go to the supermarket and they buy meat in cling film.  There\rquote s not the same link as perhaps there was in the past\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 No, mmmmmm}{\b\insrsid15297402  }{\insrsid15297402 for the vast majority of people.  I mean I eat meat.  I think if I \'85\'85 I think I could quite easily become a vegetarian if I really, if I actually did all the coo
king and prepared the meat you know, if I think about it I think its horrendous to be honest that I\rquote m actually eating an animal, a piece of an animal, but I don\rquote t think about it.  If a chop comes on the table it\rquote 
s a piece of cooked meat and I don\rquote t think about it.  If I do think about it,  I\rquote d probably have difficulty in eating it to be honest.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 Um, is there anything that I haven\rquote t asked you that you think is important, or important to you?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 No I don\rquote t think so.  I mean, the only thing I just do hope goin
g back to researchers and all the rest of it, I just hope that um, that what your doing and what your Department is doing will be of use.  And that um, yeah that it will be used.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 If you could have one good thing that comes out of this research, what do you think it will be?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid15297402 Well I think the good thing will be that there won\rquote t be the suffering, the human suffering because I still put humans above animals.  Um, and I just hope that there won\rquote t be the human suffering that\rquote 
s gone on in this last year if anyth
ing like this happens again.  I think that is the one thing that I hope will come out of it. I mean, if you say, if there was gonna be another, if there was another Foot & Mouth outbreak one would hope that there will be enough learnt from this episode.  
And from this project that your doing that everything can be put in place now to make sure that it will be dealt with professionally and properly.  Um, you can\rquote t prepare for every contingency, you can\rquote 
t I know that.  But I think really that one just wants to feel that there is somebody in charge who knows what they\rquote re doing.  Um, and I think the overall feeling in the community and certainly for me was that there wasn\rquote 
t anybody in overall charge of the whole thing directing operations until the Brigadier came. [laugh]
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 OK thanks very much for your time.
\par }{\insrsid15297402 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15297402 
\par 
\par }}