{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f99\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f100\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f102\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f103\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f104\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f105\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f106\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f107\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f110\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f113\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f114\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f117\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid155187\rsid5964600\rsid7163914\rsid8922443\rsid10253706
\rsid10827478\rsid12075514\rsid14762434}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr15\min34}{\printim\yr2002\mo11\dy17\hr13\min37}{\version7}{\edmins6}{\nofpages26}
{\nofwords5370}{\nofchars30614}{\nofcharsws35913}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180
\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot12075514 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10827478 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10827478 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10827478 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid10827478 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid10827478 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid12075514 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid10827478 
\par Interview ID:  PM07}{\insrsid10827478 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs18\insrsid10827478 PAGE  
}}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid155187 1}}}{\cs18\insrsid10827478 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid10827478 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid10827478 Date of Interview: 14/03/02
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Date of birth: 1964
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10827478 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid10827478 Occupation: Group 6}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid10827478 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid10827478 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid10827478  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid10827478 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par }\pard \s19\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b0\i\f0\insrsid10827478 I arrived by taxi as the family car was unavailable and w
alked through the reception area.  L held open the door to her kitchen, "come on in" where her golden retriever made a fuss of me. "We'll go through to the dining room" - so we settled in one of the rooms looking over the A road  and beyond to rolling pas
tures. L's 15 year old daughter popped in , "What's for tea then" and the phone which rang in the background must have been picked up by someone in}{\b0\i\f0\insrsid12075514  a different part of the house}{\b0\i\f0\insrsid10827478 
. We settled at the round table and started the tape.}{\i\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par }\pard \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Where I usually start is by asking you to tell me a little bit about you, your background and your family.
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 We bought the practice about twelve years ago now, with my hubbie the vet, and one daughter, and the dog.  Only one dog is ours, the other is somebody else\rquote 
s.   Me and G met when we both worked in a veterinary practice in Blackburn in Lancashire and then moved up here.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you\rquote re both from outside Cumbria?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  G is from Middlesborough and I\rquote m from Lancashire.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Is your background rural?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, yes.  I suppose both of ours is actually.  G used to help out on a farm when he was younger and I used to deal more with horses.  I used to skive of school and go and work at the vets.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you knew what he wanted to do when you  left school?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  The only time we ever questioned it really was last year and we even got to the stage of looking in the job pages and decided that we didn\rquote t want to do anything else anyway so we would stick it out.
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par So you met in a veterinary practice, and was G qualified?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes he had just qualified.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And were you working?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 They had like a large animal hospital bit, just on the farm with one of the partners and I worked on that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Right.  So you were assisting?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 How old were you when you married?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I was only 20, I\rquote m now 37.   We met when I was [PAUSE]   nearly 18 [PAUSE]   quite young really isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you move up here quite soon after you were married?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes as soon as we were married we moved up.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And the intention was to have your own practice?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Yes, I suppose it was always [PAUSE] I know it had always been Gs dream, I\rquote d never really thought about it.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you move in here?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No. No, we moved nearby, G got a job here.  It was MW\rquote s practice before and then we moved in when he retired.  That was in 1989.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So it\rquote s actually been your practice for a considerable time?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So are the bulk of your clients mainly rural farmers?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Sort of 70 percent large [animals] and 30 percent small.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And is that the sort of practice that you wanted?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, definitely.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So are your family still down in Lancashire?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Presumably you\rquote ve made quite a lot if friends?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Oh yes I\rquote ve made some good friends up here.  I couldn\rquote t go back now.  If somebody had said in the first six months, do you want to go back, I might have done, but not now [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And your daughter was obviously born here?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, she was born here.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Are your friends mainly from a rural community or is it quite mixed?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Quite mixed really, yes, yes.  We lived outside Cumwhinton when we first moved up here, then we moved to Scotby when }{\b0\f0\insrsid7163914 [daughter]}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
 was young, so then you sort of get a mixture of rural and town.  The person  who we first moved in next door to, now lives close by and we\rquote 
re still friendly.  So there have been some long friendships [PAUSE]  and my wonder woman who helps me with my house, she\rquote s been a friend for a while of course [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes it\rquote s a lovely house.  I love the aerial photo.
\par 
\par Can you tell me about your staffing as you built the practice up?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 When we first came, G went into partnership with one of the other vets that was here in 1989, and there was just the two of them and one nursing receptionist, but not a qualified nurse, so soon after they\rquote 
d taken over they got another vet, so there was just the three of them.  Then we sort of gradually built up to four vets and we got some more nurses.  Just before foot and mouth we had four and a half vets and now there\rquote 
s six and some part time nurses.
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So quite a big practice.  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Then by the end of foot and mouth there was one and a half vets and one nursing receptionist.  So it had sort of gone back and done a full circle really.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you\rquote d built up the practice considerably.  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So what was your first memory of the foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, well just sort of hearing it on the news.  G heard there was a suspected case of foot and mouth.   Then yes it sort of was foot and mouth, and then it\rquote s sort of ge
tting a bit nearer and nearer.  When it was first announced at Heddon on the Wall, and }{\b0\f0\insrsid10253706 [daughter]}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478  says, \'93is this bad?\'94, and I remember saying, \'93yes this is about as bad as it gets.\'94
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So what actually happened then within the practice?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 The first week we had some tests to finish and [PAUSE]  getting disinfectant, I remember that one.  That was a bit of a chore trying to find some disinfectant.  We\rquote d stopped doing the farm work, we just wouldn\rquote 
t go anywhere, and we put some disinfectant outside.  We phoned the Ministry,\'94 what do you think we should do?\'94; \'93 oh just do what you think you should do.\'94
 [LAUGHTER].  So that was useful, so we just thought right.  Granted that  yes they were obviously busy; it would be major panic going on down there.  So yes, we finished off  the TT [?] tests we\rquote 
d got to do and that was it.  We phoned up the Ministry and said, \'93do you need anything, can we help in any way?\'94   \'93No, no, no, everything is under control.\'94  So we did that on the Friday of the week it had been confirmed and the f
ollowing Monday, one of the veterinary officers from Defra phoned up and said, \'93how many can we have?\'94 [LAUGHTER]  Realisation was beginning to sink in I think. So we sent one vet down who\rquote d just had a little girl, he\rquote 
d just had a baby.  So we said, you know, with this sort of \lquote Heddon on the Wall\rquote  thing, we don\rquote t want him  sort of sent away, so if you can sort of stay in the area.  But he was quite happy to go on, we talked about it.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So he was seconded to work with Defra who were based at Rosehill at that time? 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes.  So yes, five o clock that night he phoned up, he says, \'93there sending me to the North East.\'94  I says, \'93are you happy about that\'94, he says,\'94 no, I\rquote m alright about it\'94
 and he talked to his wife about it and everything was fine.  He says \'93I\rquote m just going for three or four days\'94, so I said, \'93right, as long as you\rquote re happy\'94
.  Well it was three weeks before he came back.  That was when it all blew up, it just so went ballistic.  I mean he kept in touch.  He was one of these he was quite a quie
t person, he was hard to talk to, but once you talked about his children it was fine.  But I phoned him up just to sort of see how he was doing and he was sort of well, \'93 I\rquote ve done this and I\rquote 
ve had to do this, and this is happening, and this is happening.\'94
  You think is this the right person? [LAUGHTER.  So you know, so it had obviously been quite a strain on him [EMPHASIS].   And then at the end of that week we sent another vet down but he was based more round here, so that left two vets here at that stag
e but we sort of thought right, we\rquote re going to drop large animals we\rquote ll have to live off\'85}{\f0\insrsid10827478  
\par 
\par Well yes, that\rquote s seventy percent of your business.}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478   
\par  We\rquote re going to have to live on the small animal, but much to our amazement that stopped as well because people either thought we were too busy or we were shut [PAUSE] so the place had never been so clean [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So people just didn\rquote t like to bring their domestic pets?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No.  Nobody was going anywhere.  So we had to lay two of our staff off.  We had to lay two receptionists off.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That must have been quite hard?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.   They were really good about it because they said, \'93we knew something had to happen.\'94  Because you know, we just hadn\rquote t been doing anything.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Was that a permanent situation?}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478  
\par 
\par In one case, poor lass, she\rquote d only just come back from maternity leave, I think she\rquote d been back a week.  She said, \'93no it\rquote s alright.\'94  She was sort of quite happy and she was really good, but she said \'93
on the condition that when it\rquote s over I come back\'94, so she\rquote s come back.  The other one, she\rquote s a trained radiographer, so she\rquote s gone back to the hospital to do that, so she\rquote s quite happy.   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 What happened to the practice nurse?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 We kept one and the other one left permanently now.  We are just in the process of needing one now.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Were these relationships that you\rquote d built up over some time?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes.  I think as well it\rquote s slightly different with it being our home.  I\rquote ve always felt that if there was any sort of unrest between us and the staff, it would be awful to have to live here as well, so we
\rquote ve always sort of tried to\'85 whether it\rquote s wrong, but sometimes it does work against you but some times it does work for you\'85  so no, we are quite close.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did any of your staff live in?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No. no.  Oh no we don\rquote t do that.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 What was happening with your farming customers?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Oh that was horrendous.  The phone just\'85 the phone during the day was quiet, our slot just seemed to be at night, and me and G would both be on the phone, and it would be what are we doing, you know, I think if they\rquote 
ve got suspect cases\'85  Because at the start the Ministry was closing\'85   you know, they were putting the answering machine on, bless them.   Well I remember we had one phone up and he says, \'93I think I\rquote ve got it.\'94
  So I tried all the other numbers that we had that I didn\rquote t like to give out to everybody, but they couldn\rquote t get anybody, so in the end I phoned up one of our vets that was working down there, and said, \'93
first thing in the morning can you do something?\'94  After that, they did put the later hours on.  He discovered it five minutes before they were shutting.  I think it was six o\rquote clock when Defra were shutting and then it was like half past eight.

\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So they were ringing in desperation for advice really?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Once Defra remained open were you still getting calls for advice?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Oh yes, they were still phoning for advice.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Was this your friends as well?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  It was quite nice in a way, to think that they felt they could phone to do that.  So yes, you\rquote re not just another service provider, it\rquote s something more.  It was exhausting.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 What was happening on the clean farms where other diseases
\par may have needed treating?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Well if we could prescribe something over the phone and drop it off at the gate, then we did that, but otherwise we would have to go and visit.  To some extent it was good that we weren\rquote 
t busy because sometimes it took you an hour between each one because you had to wash everything and wash the van.  It took about an hour in between each one, but there weren\rquote t many.  If we did a call a day we were busy.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Do you think animal welfare may have suffered?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So basically farmers wouldn\rquote t be calling you out unless it was really desperate case?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Quite a lot of them needed to move their stock.  I wouldn\rquote t say out of illness it was animal welfare; it was not being able to move anything, that was the animal welfare issue not an illness thing.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  It must have been pretty critical not to be able to move them, and I suppose issues around feed as well?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Yes, that\rquote s it, farmers sort of taking feed to\'85 I mean quite a lot of them if they knew the farmer living half of a mile down the road as opposed to three miles down the road, then you\rquote 
d give him a ring, and I suppose everybody did sort of help each other out.  I know if somebody wanted some drugs, we\rquote d sort of say, well do you need anything else dropped of.  We\rquote 
d sort of collect up a run and then work out where you were going to go, because you wouldn\rquote t go past a farm that had just been infected on your route, so if you could, you\rquote d avoid that and go the long way round.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So was there a sense when you were moving round, well how is this spreading and is this ok?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes that\rquote s it, and we\rquote ve quite often said, are we making it worse, but to some extent you either did that or [PAUSE] you know, something did s
uffer.   There was still quite a lot of people moving about, you know, but some people did do the total lock in.  Did a lot of chatting to gates [LAUGHTER].  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, that must have been a bit bizarre. 
\par 
\par  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, because I mean normally we do drop stuff off for people anyway and say, oh are you alright, and have a chat, and you\rquote d come to the end of a lane and that was it, you\rquote 
d talk to a bin, and nobody there.  That [EMPHASIS] was weird.   Or if you did see anybody you would stop, and they would stop, and they\rquote d shout.  You know, you did come back to that \lquote unclean\rquote  thing, so yeh.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Do you cover quite a large area?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Not too bad.  We go down [LONG PAUSE]  I don\rquote t know [PAUSE]  we go down sort of more or less to Penrith and to sort of Heskett Newmarket and up to\'85  we
 had one at Newcastleton in Scotland, but quite a lot of them are local, you know, they\rquote re in sort of a twenty to thirty mile radius.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 How were  you managing with 70% reduction in your income?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Then, not very well.   The other frustrating thing was that we sent two of vets down to work for the Ministry but we still had to pay them because they hadn\rquote t set up anything.  They\rquote 
d been going on for three or four months before we got any payment for them, and they were using the petrol in the cars and they were using the phones, and we were having to pay them, and we were thinking, well, yeh [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you get back pay for that eventually?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, we got paid for it eventually.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 But did you have a real cash flow problem?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, yes.  It was a bit tight.  Well that was one of the first reasons for laying off staff, to relive that and give us a bit of lea-way.   But I suppose then again we weren\rquote t going anywhere or doing anything so we weren
\rquote t really spending.  And yes, it has an affect on your life.  PHONE RINGING.   That\rquote s the teenage hotline [LAUGHTER]. 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par So was }{\f0\insrsid10253706 [daughter]}{\f0\insrsid10827478  affected?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No she wasn\rquote t.  No, it worked out [PAUSE]  the people on farms who went to her school obviously didn\rquote t go to school [PAUSE]  and they were quite sort of happy that if you didn\rquote 
t want to send your child, they would send work home, but the bus goes quite a direct route and she catches it at the bottom. She wasn\rquote t coming into contact with any animals, so she herself was not dangerous.  So really you\rquote re bette
r off [PAUSE]   you know, life goes on doesn\rquote t it, you\rquote re better keeping some normality.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And it wasn\rquote t affecting friendships for her?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No thankfully, no it didn\rquote t [PAUSE]  so that was ok.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you didn\rquote t have worry about her?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So what about for you and G, obviously this was a very anxious time.  Did you find that day-to-day things like sleeping and eating a problem?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t know, I think you go into auto-pilot, and [LONG PAUSE]    I mean yes it was worrying, but it had to be done and you had to sort of keep going, and yes\'85
 We seemed to take it in turns, so when I was down he was alright, and when he was down I was alright, so we\rquote d sort of  [PAUSE],   you know, if you\rquote re both down at the same time you just say, well sorry it\rquote s not your turn it\rquote 
s mine [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you kept each other going.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes it did, it worked out ok.  As long as you did have the time away and the time to sort of have a bit of a chill.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 You did try and build that in did you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, it wasn\rquote t sort of holidays or anything, we didn\rquote 
t get a holiday, but G goes to the gym at W and we made sure that that still happened, and we did dog training classes, which then we did at Pl B.  We were wondering should we stop them, but we thought, well P B is i
n town, all the people were coming on the outskirts of town, so no, we carried on that, so that was good [PAUSE].   So yeh, to try and keep it as normal as possible, but\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Something you said that\rquote s interesting, when we were talking about the diaries, that 
even now [emphasis] people are still talking about foot and mouth, and presumably then [emphasis], it must have been quite difficult to get away from it?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, that\rquote s it.  Even when I sort of phone my sister or something, she\rquote ll say how \lquote s it going, you know, you just talk about something else, not\'85
 you know, it rained today [LAUGHTER]  oh did it, good [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Does your sister live in Lancashire?
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And not elated to farming?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No.  She\rquote s a bit of a townie [LAUGHTER],  so that was quite good, because she was totally ignorant and didn\rquote t really know anything about\'85  she does now. [PAUSE]  but she educated them all at work [LAUGHTER].

\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you expect it to go on for as long as it did?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No. No.  There\rquote s no reason why it should have done [PAUSE]     if you\rquote d have sat down for five minutes and thought about it\'85 People used to get het up and get frustrated and everything and you\rquote 
d sort of sit down after and you\rquote d think, it\rquote s a bug [EMPHASIS]  that\rquote s all [EMPHASIS]    it is [PAUSE],    you know, and quite an 
easily killed bug.  I think somebody with a box of matches and light the paper work that would have done em good}{\f0\insrsid10827478  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 [LAUGHTER].   So yes, if they\rquote 
d sat down and thought about it rather than going around saying,  \'93what shall we do, what shall we do, what shall we do.\'94
  Because I mean we got nothing [EMPHASIS].  We looked back, we get sort of inserts and things as to how you do this and how you do that, so we looked at the foot and mouth one and it was 1967, was the last one, and of course it had never been upda
ted, so we thought, ah well that\rquote s not much good is it.  So then we tried on the website to see if we could get anything off the Ministry website, but no.  This was before they got their foot and mouth website put up.  Then we\rquote 
d phone them of course,\'94 what shall we do?\'94;  \'93well just do what you want\'94 [LAUGHTER],   basically was the answer.   So we got a new graduate in and we said, \'93go home and look at your notes and just see what you\rquote ve got on it\'94
, so she came back with this half a page  [LAUGHTER],   half a A4 piece of paper, that\rquote s all they\rquote d done [PAUSE]  and they\rquote d watched the video of course, the foot and mouth famous video, which hasn\rquote 
t been changed since 67 either.  So yeh, I think that was it, it was just major, you know, they hadn\rquote t had anything [PAUSE]  to [EMPHASIS]   do,  so yeh, they were panicking. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 no strategy?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 They\rquote d no forms.  I kept saying next time we go to war I\rquote m going to fight for Germany because this lot won\rquote t have the right forms.   Total panic and chaos, you know [PAUSE].
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par It sounds like right in the beginning the Government were taken by surprise, they had no contingency plans, no strategy, so when did you feel it was under control?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 It was good when the army got involved.  It wasn\rquote t a case of \'93oh can we do that\'94, it was \'93just do it, think about it later.\'94 You know, whatever we do\'85
 you know, this is what we need, get on with it.  So yes, from the army being involved I would think.
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Was that a general feeling  that you were getting from the community?
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Have you got any personal views on the large disposal sites?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I think that\rquote s rather worrying.   I mean you can\rquote t bury that many carcasses and not have some problem at some stage [PAUSE],  you know, there\rquote s going to be something isn\rquote t there [PAUSE]  no matter 
how much they\rquote ve lined it. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 It is massive; you have to see it to believe it.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I know, I keep thinking I\rquote d like to go\'85  it\rquote s one of those, I\rquote d like to go but I don\rquote t know whether I would.   They\rquote re going to turn it into a nature reserve apparently.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Well yes, that\rquote s the idea.
\par 
\par Have you heard any particular concerns from friends or colleagues about it?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes basically the same, you just can\rquote t bury that amount\'85 and I mean some of them were half rotten before they got there, weren\rquote t they.  That was horrible.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And are there concerns about things such as the water supply?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Water supplies in general and sort of human health.  Nobody seems concerned about the pyres though.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 What are your feelings about that; were you aware of pyres?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Oh aye.   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478  What was}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478   }{\f0\insrsid10827478 the worst bit?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 The worst bit was as you stand at the reception desk and there\rquote s a window opposite and it looks onto the South West of coast of Scotland, on a clear day you can see that, and that was just, you know, there\rquote 
d be a pyre smoke there, and you know, we got up to six or nine, you could see from that, it was just a small window.  You go out in the morning to take the dogs out and open the back door and it was like \lquote phew\rquote .
\par 
\par   }{\f0\insrsid10827478 A really bad smell.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  It hung [PAUSE].  That went on for a while, that was a curfew route. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, it went on for a while through the summer didn\rquote t it.  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Then you would get the odd day, as it started to get less,  where it hit you.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Was there any sort of community protest or action group within your area?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No.  Oh}{\b0\f0\insrsid8922443 ,}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478  one of our farmers near the motorway just after Southwaite services I think [PAUSE], \'93 Blair fiddles as Cumbria burns\'94. [a large board set up in a field overlook
ing the motorway].
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Yes.  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par That\rquote s her [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Sort of a national protest really isn\rquote t it. 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 She got quite involved with that and she went on the march down in London, which some folks sort of\'85 I don\rquote t know, it never really came to anything did it, but [PAUSE],    that\rquote 
s the frustrating thing.  I think that was one of the things that hurt [EMPHASIS],   is that they don\rquote t really care do they.  You know, they sort of all came up and trudged around and, you know [PAUSE].   He got his election in the end,
 and as far as he was concerned\'85 well that\rquote s what it seemed anyway, you know, that was it.   I don\rquote t know, they never really got it, the affect it was having.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Why do you think that was?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t know,  they don\rquote t listen.  They don\rquote t understand.  All the decisions for the culls were made by somebody down in London.  We have one of ours that\'85
 I think she was South African, the TVI that went out to do it, and yes this is foot and mouth and they need to be slaughtered, and she did all the trillions of paper work and organised the slaughter team, and they arrived and she says, \'93oh I haven
\rquote t heard from Page Street yet whether or not I can kill them.\'94  So they waited three hours and they were querying it, and she was sort of saying,  \'93look, they\rquote ve no skin and they\rquote re blistering and they\rquote re septic\'94;  
\'93oh no they said, you\rquote ll have to wait another hour\'94, so she put the phone down and she said, \'93get on with it.\'94    That was another one of us taking the law into our own hands
\par 
\par .  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 But that must have been hugely stressful for the farming community
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Well they got up, they had one when they got up, at half five that was, you know, an hour later it was another one.  By the time it was all sorted, they\rquote d thirty showing signs.
\par 
\par   }{\f0\insrsid10827478 We\rquote re talking about a very virulent strain here aren\rquote t we?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s it, because there are all sorts of different strains, it\rquote s like all these bugs\'85 [PAUSE]   and people still treat it like a human.  It\rquote s human, it\rquote 
s going to come back and get them [the virus].  There is a couple of ours, you know\'85 I find that rather worrying.  So yes, it\rquote s like a human enemy.  But whether they need that to cope, I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 There have been all sorts of theories put forward as to how and why it spread.  Do you have your own particular view?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t believe in dangerous contacts.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s interesting.  Do you want to say a bit more about that?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Well not that they would kill within three kilometres, I don\rquote t agree with that at all.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And sometimes of course, it might be that somebody\rquote s corner of land just might be touched on IP [infected premises]..  There were a lot of anomalies round that weren\rquote t there. 
\par 
\par  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t know, I think we\rquote re to blame.  I think people\'85 somebody said, you\rquote ve got to have a funny side [PAUSE],   they said it showed how friendl
y Cumbrians were [LAUGHTER].  They obviously do get about, because when they started doing the traceability, you know, you find that half of Cumbria had been visiting that farm, and\'85 so yes it was quite scary. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you feel that farms that went into voluntary isolation, they were doing the most sensible thing really?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Um. Um.   But then you get\'85 we had one, they\rquote d done a total shut in, and everybody else had gone around them, and you know, after a while they ended up getting it.  So I don\rquote t know for definite, you can\rquote 
t say\'85 I don\rquote t think anybody can. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Then of course a lot of them were taken out as DCs [dangerous contacts] anyway.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Um.  But I think that everybody should have been given the chance.  If they wanted the chance they should have been given the
 chance [PAUSE],  you know, to see what happened, because there are some which had been left [EMPHASIS]  they were totally surrounded by IPs and have never got it.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you\rquote re saying that the whole DCs as you said\'85 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Yes, was it right to do [PAUSE]?  I don\rquote t think we can kill again on the scale they did.  
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par No, it was quite massive wasn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par What was the worst aspect for you about the foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Farmers crying [LONG PAUSE].  I don\rquote t know, I think the frustration as well.  You know, they we
re sort of phoning you for advice and you know, what can you give them [PAUSE].   Just your life being turned upside down just like that, you know, in a flash, you know, it was like a whole different ball game [LONG PAUSE].  Frustration I would say the mo
st [PAUSE]  and anger.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So you found yourself almost in a counselling role.  It must have been tough?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. Yes.  That wasn\rquote t nice.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you have someone you could off load to?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Well I sort of off loaded, I suppose to the sta
ff, family and I suppose to each other.  So yes, we did off load, and a lot of it was just to listen, you know, and talk to them and sort of try and cheer them up a bit.  I had one farm, we started sending e-mails to them, they\rquote 
d sort of locked themselves in, it was near Easter and the bottom of her last one, she\rquote d said that the Easter bunny wouldn\rquote t be coming this year}{\f0\insrsid10827478  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
[LAUGHTER],  so I sneaked round and I left her a Easter egg [LAUGHTER].  So she needn\rquote t think [EMPHASIS]  she\rquote s getting one this year [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 I suppose your social life would have just dwindled?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  Nobody went anywhere or anything.  So we some e-mailing us regularly.  One had a little baby in January, so yes that was a bit hard for them.  So that was sort of nice, and we had a few jo
kes and those little Readers Digest things were quite good [LAUGHTER],    just as a bit of light entertainment.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Anything good that came out of the foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I think to see everybody pulling together and how everybody sort of helped everybody else, which they did.  So yeh, the community spirit.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Has that been sustained do you think?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yeh. Yeh.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s really interesting isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Our relationship now with our farmers is different to what it was definitely. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 What closer, more friendly? 
\par  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Closer, to what it was, definitely. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Something perhaps you took for granted in the past?  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Yes. Yes.  So yes, that\rquote s nice. And knowing that  this is going to be over.  It will all go away.  The trouble is it might all come back [LAUGHTER].  That\rquote s the worrying thing because they haven\rquote 
t done anything to stop [PAUSE],   you know\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Do you find that is a real worry out in the community?
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Yes.  Oh yes.  It\rquote s not if it\rquote s coming back, it\rquote s when it\rquote s coming back.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s what you find, particularly in the farming community?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes. They\rquote re just waiting
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And what do you feel about that?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t know, I think they maybe right but you can\rquote t go on like that, I mean it might be [EMPHASIS]   this year, it might be next year,  it might be another thirty years.  But yeh I think it will.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Do you hear discussions about vaccination then?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No. No, we did at the time, there was quite a lot of phone calls, what did we think of vaccination [LONG PAUSE]   but no not now.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Do you have a particular viewpoint on that?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I think [PAUSE]  at that [EMPHASIS],    it wasn\rquote 
t right, because the people who are vaccinated would be in a very difficult position now and the ones that were vaccinated in Holland showed that.  I think what people need to realise is that the milk that they alr
eady buy; the cows are vaccinated against all sorts of things.   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 I was just wondering, if you compare it to somewhere like say Argentina and its cattle, its one of biggest beef producers isn\rquote t it.  What they do is that when they export some of their mark
ets, obviously the European market sells the meat off the bone, but other markets like the Middle East don\rquote t, because they routinely vaccinate don\rquote t they.  I mean they stopped for a while didn\rquote t they and then they had an outbreak.  

\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s right, because it\rquote s sort of endemic over there.   The other thing with vaccinations is that you get low yields, they don\rquote t produce as much, and health wise, you know, they don\rquote 
t tend to be as healthy. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Right.
\par 
\par So it\rquote s not an option you\rquote d like to see?       
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 No not if we can help it, but then of course you\rquote re saying you can\rquote t do the killing  again, so what do you do.
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Difficult one isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par Just in terms of the practice, can I ask how things are now for you?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Getting better.  Towards the end of foot and mouth we\rquote d had one and a half vets, we\rquote ve now got two and a half and we\rquote re looking for another one, so we\rquote ve got three and a half,  we\rquote 
re hoping to stop there, and we\rquote ve just got another receptionist, so that leaves the paper work side and what have you.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Does that mean you\rquote re back to two receptionists?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Two receptionists and a nurse, but the new receptionist is going to do both.  She fancies having a go at the nursing as well.  So she\rquote s going to do a bit of both.  So that\rquote s quite nice because, you know, t
his is what we\rquote re meant to do, this is what we\rquote re here to do.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Can you put a date on that returning point in terms of when you could start to reinstate staff or is that only just beginning to happen?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s only just beginning to happen.  We got the new vet, it will be a month the Fourth of February [2002], so it\rquote s more or less a full year.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Can you put a time on how long it might take to recover?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I think another two years from now.  By the time everybody\rquote s got themselves sorted out and they\rquote ve got the st
ockin situation that they had stock in  because they were [EMPHASIS]   good stock, you know, Cumbria was renowned for sort of breeding good stock, and getting back into their carving lambing patterns.  Like this year, everybody\rquote 
s going to be lambing all year I think [LAUGHTER].
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par It\rquote s a bit of a mess as well isn\rquote t it with licences?
\par 
\par   }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Oh yes. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Presumably you\rquote re now getting a lot of those sort of queries are you?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Umm.  That\rquote s what the main queries are now, the licensing, but since they brought the general licence out at the beginning of February that\rquote s\'85
 you know, they were all a bit shocked though because, no I need a license, no you don\rquote t, this is the licence, take it [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 In theory it\rquote s suppose to have made things easier isn\rquote t it.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Well that\rquote s it, but in some ways I don\rquote t know whether they should have changed it, because they were actually quite used to it, they couldn\rquote t do [EMPHASIS]  these things without a lice
nce and they knew that they\rquote d got in for that, the one thing that doesn\rquote t go is farmers and paperwork, They\rquote re there to farm they\rquote re not there to do paperwork, it just doesn\rquote t mix, and when they\rquote 
re sort of firing all these bits and pieces at them it\rquote s [PAUSE]  you know.  So yes, there has been quite a lot of illegal movements I would have thought.   But  purely out of, \'93I don\rquote 
t understand what they want.  I need to do this for the animals\'94.   It\rquote s very hard to knock really.
\par 
\par TAPE TURNED OVER
\par 
\par It just helps you put it back in perspective.  That\rquote s what you\rquote ve got to do.  It\rquote s so easy when you\rquote re surrounded by the depression and the upset and the frustration every day, it sort of drags you down and that\rquote 
s where you can stay, so until you sort of think, no come on [PAUSE],   which is what we are doing now.  You know it is just [EMPHASIS]  a bug, it\rquote s just something that has happened.  It\rquote s been awful and it\rquote 
s terrible but you do have to\'85 that\rquote s what we\rquote re made like isn\rquote t it, we bounce back quite well.   
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Well you\rquote re quite resilient aren\rquote t you.  You seem to be quite cheerful and what you\rquote ve been through}{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 is huge isn\rquote t it, and you\rquote ve been saying to me it
\rquote s going to be two years from now so I think you\rquote re very positive and very up beat.   }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par 
\par I think that\rquote s one thing that\rquote s kept us going though, you have to [PAUSE],  you have to sort of look past what\rquote s going on, although it\rquote s hard sometimes. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 But when you\rquote re in the middle of something and you\rquote ve got others looking to you for help and advice, and there must have been times when you\rquote ve had awful days and the phone rings.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Saved by the farmer next door actually.  Her sheep went on the voluntary cull, Easter last year and she said I could walk the dog in the fields and that was good.  
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That was your way of getting out and getting away from it all?  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I even made slow gin.  I had the chance to do things that I\rquote ve never done before [PAUSE]   but I\rquote ll be doing it next year because it is rather nice. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s good; because it is your home as well as your livelihood and it must have been very hard to get away.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  We have an answering service}{\f0\insrsid10827478  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 down in Devon.  
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par In Devon?  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Umm, it\rquote s an ambulance answering service, they\rquote re really really good.  So they used to sort of take the phones when we were on duty, but when this s
tarted we thought really we should be here, so, you know, we sort of stopped that.  You sort of had the phones the whole time and yes it was\'85 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par And there must be times when you wanted to pick the phone up and say, pee off. 
\par 
\par  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes}{\f0\insrsid10827478 .  
\par 
\par But really understanding because there is only so much you can give.  
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 That\rquote s right, yes, you\rquote ve got to sort of know that you can only give so much and at some point you\rquote ve got to say no or [EMPHASIS] recharge.  I need a little space for me and then you can\'85 I don\rquote 
t know, I quite like looking after [PAUSE].  I couldn\rquote t look after people.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Well it sounds to me like you do that anyway.  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par Although I can talk [LAUGHTER].  
\par 
\par   }{\f0\insrsid10827478 A bit like you were saying about the animals and the animal welfare and life going
 on, life goes on, you have a teenage daughter and a home and you have a business.  I think sometimes this business is about being the wife, the mother, it\rquote s ok, but what about space for you? 
\par 
\par  }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, you\rquote ve not got to get into the trap of  being  wonder woman.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 In terms of any sort of recovery funding, presumably you knew that was there, did it apply to you, have you thought about\'85
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 We thought about the business rates and we sent a form in but we never heard back and so that was\'85
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 And you didn\rquote t chase it?  
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par No.
\par The thing is, you didn\rquote t have to pay your VAT, but you still had to pay it in six months time so we thought well if we can\rquote t afford to pay it now, will we be able to afford it then, and we\rquote 
ll have to pay double. So we decided we would carry on and do what we have to do and pay what we had to pay for, if it ran out then we\rquote 
d stop [LAUGHTER].  Well we applied for a Business Link loan for advertising, so we got that, which it must finish because it has to be in by the end of March, so.  We\rquote ve managed to get a website and we got some pens [LAUGHTER],}{
\f0\insrsid10827478   }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 and we had a farmers\rquote  meeting, so that was nice.  That was in September ,October time last year, so that was quite nice.
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 
\par What did that involve?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 It was just like talking about bio security and restocking and trying to look to the future.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Did you have a goodresponse?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 We did. Yes, it was surprising.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Where did you hold that?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 At the Shepherds Inn. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 So it was quite a big venue?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  It was good.  It was good and it was nice to see everybody because you\rquote ve spoken to them on the phone.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Was that just the practice?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes.  We just decided that it would be nice to do. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Quite something to do isn\rquote t it? 
\par 
\par   }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 Yes, well I think D did it, something similar in January.  Yes so that was quite nice, and just to give them advice on restocking and what to look for and everything else.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 Before we close, is there anything I haven\rquote t asked you that you would like to comment on?
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0\insrsid10827478 I don\rquote t think so. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid10827478 I thanked L for her time.
\par }}