{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1266775\rsid1711388\rsid2054573\rsid4852068\rsid15103024\rsid16413308}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info
{\title Would you like to tell me a little bit about your background}{\author Sandra Catherine Hudson}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy4\hr16\min12}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy4\hr16\min16}{\printim\yr2004\mo2\dy4\hr16\min58}{\version4}{\edmins4}
{\nofpages20}{\nofwords4916}{\nofchars28022}{\*\company Packard Bell NEC}{\nofcharsws32873}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot2054573 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid1266775 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1266775 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1266775 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1266775 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid1266775 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid2054573 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid1266775 
\par Interview ID:  PM17
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid1266775 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid16413308 3}}}{\cs17\insrsid1266775 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid1266775 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1266775 Date of Interview: 12/03/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid1266775 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Date of birth: 1936
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid1266775 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid1266775 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid1266775  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1266775 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid1266775 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid1266775 
I arrived at J's neat bungalow in a blustery wind that carried me across the circular flat stones on his lawn. I was greeted at the door by J and his wife A who said, "Ah I thought I recognised you, we met on the N bus all those years ago and you told me 
a
bout your studies."  I was about to pat the large dog but J advised me not to, "he's not a cuddly dog."  J and I settled into a dark sitting room full of leather and books while A made coffee. J looked drawn and tired, yes he's had some health worries but
 they were being investigated.  We started the tape.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Would you like to tell me a little bit about your background?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 From 1974 to 1994 I was }{\f0\insrsid15103024 [a] }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Librarian, and then I retired in 1994 and did a three-year training course with a Masters degree
, which led to me being ordained.  For the past four and a half years I have been the Curate at }{\f0\insrsid15103024 \'85}{\f0\insrsid1266775  and }{\f0\insrsid15103024 \'85}{\f0\insrsid1266775 .   
\par 
\par My Vicar retired eighteen months ago, and so I promised I would hold the fort until somebody else arrived, and E R arrived on the 28}{\f0\super\insrsid1266775 th}{\f0\insrsid1266775 
 of November last year (2001).  So I was in the thick of it, and I was the only publicly available telephone number in the town.  I was the person who was being rung up by the Guardian, the Telegraph and g
oodness knows what else, as well as national television.  So it was a bit rough [PAUSE]   and we [EMPHASIS] were [PAUSE]\'85
  We did everything we could.  We rang people up; I mean the telephone bill doubled.  We wrote to people every month, sometimes we wrote individual letters and sometimes we sent a general one.  I mean you can\rquote t [PAUSE]\'85
 it came out that they weren\rquote t recognising some of the symptoms of stress, and the doctor, the health person said\'85  So we sent a general thing out saying look out for these
 symptoms and if you have any problems get in touch with the doctor.  Then we rang people up and we pushed all the information we could into the Parish magazine because we couldn\rquote 
t visit anybody.  So that became a source of information for things like the Addington fund}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid1266775 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\super\insrsid1266775 \chftn }{\insrsid1266775  }}}{\f0\insrsid1266775 
 and all of those advice lines and what have you [PAUSE],   and then we just kept going until it kind of fizzled out.  So really we had thirty-six farms with foot and mouth and I think five or six without.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 If I can just take you right back, do you have any memories of the 
\lquote 67 outbreak?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.  I can vaguely [EMPHASIS]  remember them, but they didn\rquote t affect Cumbria, they were mainly in Cheshire.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So you were living in Cumbria?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 We were living in Cumbria.  From 65 I was Deputy County Librarian of }{\f0\insrsid16413308 \'85}{\f0\insrsid1266775 , and then from \lquote 71 I was Chief Librarian of }{\f0\insrsid16413308 \'85}{\f0\insrsid1266775 , until \lquote 
74.  So yes I do remember it, but it didn\rquote t affect Cumbria, and it didn\rquote t affect the rural service that we were providing.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 So you couldn\rquote t really compare it with the most recen
t outbreak?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Only in talking to people about it.  The basic problem I understand from talking to people is that the farms  are twice as big and they had twice as much stock on [PAUSE], and many farmers\'85
 one hates to say this, but they were farming the subsidy and not the sheep.  So they were interested in the farming subsidy and not the sheep, so that was . . . .  And there were [EMPHASIS]     a huge number of animals, which there might not have been, 
\'85this is pure hearsay\'85 there might not have been in \lquote 67.  I mean, in \lquote 67 farming was reasonably prosperous, whereas they were having a rough time.  And I mean, we\rquote 
ve just talked about twelve hundred pounds profit, and farming was somewhere on its knees before all this started, and of course what\rquote s going to happen now is we\rquote ve got to revaluate what our farming does.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 
So at the beginning of this outbreak you were actually holding the fort in Longtown?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1266775 
Yes.  Yes.   We were out having a meal with somebody, and J came in and said\'85 because we\rquote d just heard the rumours of foot and mouth\'85 and they said, we understand that it\rquote s at Longtown. From then on it seemed to be\'85
 it was hell [PAUSE]  to put it bluntly. I mean you put your lights on as you drove through Longtown, and the smell in the back of your throat.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Can you remember what your initial feelings were right at the beginning?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes, total and absolute [EMPHASIS] confusion.  I don\rquote t think even [EMPHASIS]      the farmers knew what they were doing.  I don\rquote t think the Ministry [EMPHASIS]     knew what they were doing.  I mean we [EMPHASIS]   didn
\rquote t know what we were doing.   The first farm that had [EMPHASIS] it, I think they had six hundred cattle; they waited a week before they killed them, by which time the entire herd had gone down.  They killed them and put them in 
a silage pit near the house, and then when they came to move them they fell apart, I mean, it was horrendous.  There were sagas  like that going on all the time.  So yes, you [EMPHASIS]  were just trying to do what you could [PAUSE],  bearing in mind that
 you couldn\rquote t visit [PAUSE],  you were pouring disinfectant over your car wheels, you were trying all the time to raise the morale [PAUSE], either by letter\'85
  I did get the Bishop and the Archdeacon to visit the place [PAUSE] and that boosted morale a little.  Just people were saying nobody cares about them.  We immediately set up a Task Force for the future and I [EMPHASIS]  got on it [PAUSE].  So I\rquote 
m still on the Task Force.  There\rquote s two bodies in Longtown looking at the future, one is called the Task Forc
e, which tries hard but is not doing very well, the other is suppose to be taking this New Market Town Initiative forward because there might be some money available.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 At the initial outbreak you had quite established relationships didn\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Oh yes, yes.  I mean I\rquote 
ve been working with the parishioners for three and a half years.  I knew the farmers well, I was popping in to see farmers into the March and you know all those things, the relationships were fairly  good, and they were very supportive of the 
church.  Well I mean, not everybody was but by and large they were.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So your normal working life would have included visiting farmers and other people out in the community?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And suddenly that had to stop?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 It had to stop.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And it was at a time when people were going through extreme stress?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.  I mean we had to\'85 we rang people up, and we wrote to people, and then we made sure that the Parish magazine was a point of contact.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 You rang, but did your parishioners ring you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Once or twice they rang me but normally I rang them, and then Ml B, who was a member of the Carl team, Council of Agricultural Rural Life came a long and helped me.  Didn\rquote 
t really do very much, but I needed some [EMPHASIS]     support because I was floundering [PAUSE],   well we all [EMPHASIS]   were.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 But also, you were in quite a difficult situation anyway, because there was just you, there should normally be you and the vicar, and you should have retired, so that must have all been very difficult.   
\par 
\par What happened about the normal church services?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 We closed Nichol Forest and Kirkandrews for two months and we kept Arthuret going.  We started ringing the bell to tell farmers we were praying for them, so we rang the bell every service and that worked alright and then we sang 
\lquote Oh God our help in ages past\rquote  at every service.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 What would happen to communion, I mean, did you have particular people who had particular needs or particular blessings where they normally would have come to church, so how did they cope?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 I don\rquote 
t think we did anything special on those lines.  I mean we just had the standard Holy Communion service at Arthuret every Sunday, and Kirkandrews and Nichol Forest were desperate to get their churches open.  I said, to the church wardens, this 
is your decision not mine, you know, you make the decision, and after two months, because there are no animals in the field, you don\rquote 
t know, Kirkandrews is half a mile across the field, and Nichol Forest was on the road anyway, so we just reopened and kept on going. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 But during that time presumably there were weddings and such like?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Well yes, I was very lucky there.  I had one wedding, which I was a bit worried about, because if we had kept the church closed there might have had to be problems, but we ope
ned the church just in time for the wedding.  The big problems were funerals.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 I was going to say, funerals, what happened?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Well we did have one [EMPHASIS]   at Kirkandrews, which we did while the church was closed, but that was alright, and then of course Longtown, most of them are there anyway.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 In terms of visits being curtailed, what about people who were dying, or dealing with loved ones who were dying, did you just have to deal with that over the phone?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 You dealt with that over the phone.  Most [EMPHASIS] of the ones who were dying were fortunately in hospital, so that wasn\rquote 
t too bad, and a number of people who I visited regularly were in the urban areas.  There was only farms you couldn\rquote t visit, so a fair bit of visiting went on, but we didn\rquote t visit
 any farms, we just rang them up [PAUSE], and sometimes got it in the neck [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So there were a lot of emotions swirling around?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.  One person in particular was very angry, and said, you don\rquote t do anything and the church doesn\rquote t do anything, and I said, we\rquote re trying to.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Ok so movement wasn\rquote t restricted other than within farms but was there a sense of, should I be making this journey?  Presumably, because it\rquote s a fairly rural community you\rquote re going to be passing farms to get to o
ther parishioners?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Oh yes.  You had this constant dread that you would bring it from Longtown to here, so, I mean I\rquote 
ve still got half a gallon of disinfectant, you just sprayed everything [PAUSE] and disinfected everything you possibly could with a spray 
and disinfected the whole time.  I mean all [EMPHASIS] the clergy were doing that; they were just spraying the vehicles the whole time
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So that added to your workload?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes it was.  I mean it didn\rquote t take very long to spray, but yes it did.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 I suppose asking a member of the clergy if it increases their workload is probably a bit of a silly question because I know you probably put in very long days anyway, but did you notice an increase?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 There was a significant increase in workload. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So that would have been huge. 
\par  
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 
Mainly because you were floundering.  I mean nobody [EMPHASIS]  knew what they were doing.  Fortunately we had the CARL team  (Centre for Agricultural and Rural Life) team who very quickly got themselves organised, who were able not only to offe
r advice but also to give money.  So they could give up to two thousand pounds to a farm who was having problems with the animals, from the Addington fund.  People were sending us [EMPHASIS] money.  I mean we\rquote 
ve still got some money that people were sendin
g, and yes [EMPHASIS]  the work increased and we seemed to be involved.  There seemed to be a lot to do, you know, writing letters, posting them out, getting the envelopes done and ringing people up, and also still driving round.  Everything I do in Longt
own is half an hour to it from here and half an hour at Longtown.
\par  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Can you say a bit more about the Addington fund?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 The Addington fund is a fund which is held at Stoneleigh for farmers, and because we had the CARL team here, five or six people, we were able with D S, we had access to this fund, and the Government said, if you put fifty pounds in we
\rquote ll put fifty pounds in, and so it actually\'85  we must of got rid of a million.  We were limited [EMPHASIS] to two thousand pounds, I mean I was bottom party to i
t because it was dealt directly with the CARL team, because a lot of things had to be confidential, but I just pushed people in that direction.  I know one [EMPHASIS] person who got three thousand pounds.   It just helped with feed and things like that.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Was the fund specifically set up to deal with\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 It was set up to help agriculture and it was administered by the Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire.  So that was useful, I mean we could not only do ministry but we could be practical as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So you were [emphasis]   actually doing quite a lot of hard ships?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 There were a number of hardships around, yes.  I mean I didn\rquote t deal with it.  I knew people had [EMPHASIS] hardship, all I was making sure was that they knew what they could do, and M B an
d the CARL team dealt very directly with the applications.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Do you think these were particularly farms that were not culled out?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 A number who had feed problems were not culled out, yes.  I mean it was just North Cumbria, but I mean at one point we knew th
at North Cumbria was not claiming as much from the Addington fund as it was with other people elsewhere, so again a letter went out saying that if you want to claim this is the point of contact.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So in terms of you and all this extra work and all this stress, how is it affecting you, and your health?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes, I got quite a buzz out of it I think.  In the height of it, I got quite buzz out of it.  My doctor read the riot act to me and said that as you get older, you don\rquote t cope with stress as well as you do when
 your younger, and I promised him that I would leave at Christmas if necessary, and then E came and I said I would stay until Easter, and so I\rquote m now taking three months off just to unwind from it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So you\rquote re taking three months off and then what?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 We\rquote ll wait and see what happens.  It all depends on\'85I\rquote ve got a number of things which I do, one is I\rquote m a member of the Board for Social Responsibility, and the Social Responsibility Forum, and I\rquote 
m the Anglican representative on the Justice and Peace Commission for the Roman Catholic church, and I chair and work with a group called the Cumbrian Churches Together, Environment Group, which publishes papers on the environment.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So you\rquote re very active?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 So I\rquote m fairly busy, yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 You said about your GP who read to you the riot act.  Was there a point when you had to visit your GP?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes I went to see to him because I wasn\rquote t feeling very good.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Can you say a little bit more about that or is that personal?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes, I just felt low, I think it was just exhaustion.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And when was that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 It would be about May, June.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 What was happening at home for you in terms of your wife?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Oh she was being incredibly supportive.  She left work in March so that we co
uld have the summer together [LAUGHTER]  and she was incredibly supportive and we did a lot of things together, like putting letters in envelopes and making sure everybody got it, and making sure that magazines\'85 all the things that we could do.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par Did it get to a point where it was affecting your sleeping?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 The only point where it affected my sleeping, I used to wake up in the night and I use to taste that acrid [PAUSE]\'85 you didn\rquote t seem to be able to get rid of it from the back of your throat.  I mean the pyr
es were suppose to burn for a week and I think they burned for about six to eight weeks.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And these are the pyres around Longtown?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.  I mean Longtown had a permanent fog over it [PAUSE]   and that was the reason for the \rquote  revolution\rquote .
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 I haven\rquote t heard about this.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Well I call it the\rquote  revolution\rquote .  One of the fortunate things we have is, we have a member of\'85 one of the churchwardens called J , who is a scientist, and he understands things like poly-carbons and what have you. 

\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And these were from the pyres?}{\f0\insrsid1266775   
\par 
\par These were from the pyres.  And the Ministry were going to set up a thousand cattle pyre at H, a mile and a half from the centre of Longtown, and Longtown, the Solway winds are not constant, they go like this [PAUSE]   and the town revolted.  I 
think they beat the man up who owned the farm; I think they beat him up.  We had a public meeting where they really [EMPHASIS], the second [PAUSE]  what I call the second lieutenant stream, and if J couldn\rquote 
t get to the meeting, because his particular plant is down in Staffordshire, then either M R, or I were going to have to stand up and talk about something we didn\rquote 
t know anything about [PAUSE]  and fortunately J was there, and we prevented that from going ahead.  The Guardian reporter was there, and various other people\'85
  well the town [EMPHASIS] really came together.  After that P T seemed to start to talk the same language we were talking.  Because there were the sleepers [PAUSE],   the old sleepers they were using had gone the course and got chemicals i
n them that were coming over the town, and there\rquote s some health [EMPHASIS]   anxiety over that actually.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Do you have particular concerns in terms of public health and future concerns?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Well they seem to\'85 again I don\rquote t know a great deal about it\'85 but there does seem to be that there could be some long-term health problems from those pyres [PAUSE],   because they used \'85
 I mean the H burning, was going to use Colombian  coal which is only seven per cent, or is it three per cent  sulphur, the pyres they used, initially used, West Cumbrian coal which has seventeen percent in it, and they\rquote 
re also using these sleepers with all the chemicals and what have you, so there was some anxiety in the community, and there still [EMPHASIS] is [PAUSE] over the long term effect
s of that smog.  It was a smog,  over the town for six weeks, it was terrible, I mean it was blowing over the churchyard; it must have been like Austwich I mean it was a terrible smell.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Do you have contact with local schools?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes we do.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 What was happening there?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 The schools\'85 well initially the schools had a hell of a job, because they have an awful lot of children.  I mean all the schools are in Longtown.  There\rquote 
s the infants school, the junior school and the secondary school.  They had an awful lot of children coming in terribly distressed, they also had a number who didn\rquote t [PAUSE], didn\rquote t come in, because they weren\rquote 
t allowed out [EMPHASIS]  and so you had this combination of stress in the children and the schools coped with that very w
ell, and they were actually dealing with the children first thing and then sorting them out again to send them out at night.  Some of whom of course didn\rquote 
t go home, they went out to other places.  So yes, the schools dealt with that very [EMPHASIS] well I 
thought, and they were very [EMPHASIS] worried about the exams, what it might do to the exams, but fortunately for some reason, Longtown had its  best year ever.  It was one of the most improved schools in the country, so we were quite pleased with that.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So did you find you were offering extra support?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 No, the schools didn\rquote t get involved with the church [PAUSE] when B was there, and during the inter regnum  they suddenly said can we use the church. So we\rquote ve actually developed a better relationship with th
e schools, and we now have three services a year with all the children.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 That\rquote s lovely. }{\f0\insrsid1266775  
\par 
\par A Christmas one, an Easter one and one we call \lquote one more step along the way\rquote .
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Was there ever a sense for you personally that, A, it was out of control, B, it just wasn\rquote t well managed?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 The thing was you see, we were on the Scottish border, and the Scots immediately set up a decision making centre at Dumfries, and things were obviously happening either side of the border quite differently in England than they were i
n Scotland.  Scotland was being far [EMPHASIS]   more efficient, far more ruthless, and they were making decisions locally [PAUSE].  We were having to refer decisions to London and goodness knows what else, so I think yes, it wasn\rquote 
t [EMPHASIS] as good on t
he English side of the border, as effective [EMPHASIS] on the English side of the border as it was on the Scottish side [PAUSE],  and we could see it [PAUSE],  well we had farmers who had land on both sides, and we had farmers who we knew\'85
 actually in my list of farmers, are two actually in Scotland.  I mean I used to go past them [EMPHASIS]  to get from one church to the other, you know, because you have to go through Scotland to get back into Kirkandrews and Nichol Forest.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So at any time did you have any dealings with then Maff now Defra?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 No I didn\rquote t. Only in the Task Force, as a member of the Task Force, which meant every fortnight, or once later on.  We had Michael Meecher [from the Government]  and various other people come up and talk to us, and said
, oh something\rquote s got to be done, and nothing was done.  And they talked a lot about a lot of money but nobody would tell us how to get into it [PAUSE], but I was used to that from local government.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So your expectations weren\rquote t . . . . .?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Well no, there is [EMPHASIS] a lot of free money around.  There is a lot of what they call free money around, and you\rquote ve just got to plug into it and get it, and sometimes it\rquote s difficult to get into it and you\rquote 
ve got to find a ways of doing it.  Businessmen like to have things done like that [EMPHASIS, }{\i\f0\insrsid1266775 clicks his fingers}{\f0\insrsid1266775 ], whereas politicians like to take a little longer [CHUCKLE].  So they\rquote 
re still trying to get into the money, we\rquote re still trying to restore Longtown and trying to live without it.  It suffers does Longtown, because its two miles from Gretna and it\rquote s ten miles from Brampton and they\rquote 
re both quite successful communities, and Longtown really depended totally upon the mart and agriculture, and businesses just went out. }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775  }{\f0\insrsid1266775 And it is a Health Action Zone.}{\b\f0\insrsid1266775  
\par 
\par When the army were called in, did that have an impact on general morale in Longtown, as a community?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes, I think we felt that things were moving at last. The Brigadier was on television and you felt that some things were moving.  But by that time of course, most of the animals around Longtown had gone.  I mean we weren\rquote t \'85
 we had a meeting very early on, we had a prayer meeting at Brampton, and they had a little prayer for the foot and mouth thing, and a Roman Catholic priest said his bit and his prayers,
 and the Anglican said his bit and his prayers, and the Methodist said his bit and his prayers, and I just got up at the end and said, let me tell you about Longtown [PAUSE], because it was such [EMPHASIS] a different world.  I know it\rquote 
s only ten miles away but it was a different world, it was very [EMPHASIS]  much a different one.  The smoke, the fog and the general [EMPHASIS]   depression.  I don\rquote 
t know whether what I [EMPHASIS]  did was any good or what, but nobody committed suicide which was my great [EMPHASIS]    dread. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 What did you think about national media coverage that you received?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 I thought they were very good.  The television one which I featured on\'85 I mean we had weird one from SKY, which I didn\rquote t even see, and they did it here, but the natio
nal ones, what we did in the church yard, because the smoke was blowing, it was a very dramatic view\'85 I thought they did very well, and certainly they\'85 I didn\rquote 
t like the Times articles, but the Guardian one, M E, he did the first one in here [EMPHASIS], and then he came to the \lquote revolution\rquote  and wrote a very good piece about it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Did you get involved with John S at all?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 No we didn\rquote t get involved with John S.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And local media?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 The local press were doing everything they possibly could.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And again, did you feel they gave a fair representation of what was going on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes it did. I mean the main thing as far as we were concerned, and I was concerned, was to get the Parish magazine out, and that became a point of contact with all of the information and everything w
e wanted in it, together with letters and keeping morale and everything.  So I really [EMPHASIS]   saw the Parish magazine as the key thing, which I think\'85 well nobody else was doing what we were doing. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 It sounds like a massive amount of work.
\par 
\par Did you get a team of volunteers?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes the magazine went out as normal, there were teams of people helping.  I was involved in the Task Force and the political thing and I thought it was important that someone on the clerical team was seen on television and met th
e ministry and everything else [PAUSE] but the church was [EMPHASIS]   involved.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 What were the personal consequences of foot and mouth for you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 
Personal consequences. I think that it was very [EMPHASIS] easy to get exhausted [PAUSE],  because you were so unsure of what you were doing, but I think everybody was like that.  It was unique, because we were struggling to be effective basically.  We we
ren\rquote t always sure what we did was [EMPHASIS]  effective, and then we found out things that were effective and we did them [PAUSE].  It\rquote s not a time I would like to repeat but I\rquote m very proud of it.  I wouldn\rquote 
t like to go through that again, but I don\rquote t think
 we were found wanting [PAUSE]  as a church and a community, and we did everything we possibly could.  We kept the baptisms going and we kept the funerals going and we did everything, you know, the whole church kept going.  The biggest problem for me was 
[EMPHASIS] that I lived ten miles from here which adds half an hour, an hour to everything I do. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Plus all the disinfecting and the worry it must have been very stressful.
\par 
\par What were the consequences of foot and mouth for Longtown as a community?}{\f0\insrsid1266775  
\par 
\par As I say, there were three groups of people doing things now.  Some are getting out, and some are \'85 I mean there\rquote s one farm in particular I never ever thought they would get out of farming but they are\'85
 some are restocking, and some are sitting tight and waiting to see what\rquote s going to happen.  As one farmer said to me, \'93I\rquote 
ve been to Eastern Europe, the land is rich, the growing season is longer, the labour costs are half, and they could feed the whole of Europe\'94 [PAUSE].  So I think everybody is worried about the future, and I think we\rquote 
ve got to rethink how we go.  Now Longtown is a community that relied totally on agriculture.  I mean A\rquote s wagons, they\rquote re for shifting animals, the mart itself , the feed mills the agricultural chemists, and there wasn\rquote t a lot else.
  I mean, I think it under shopped.  It\rquote s an interesting community.  Somehow we\rquote ve got to re-generate [EMPHASIS]   Longtown to make it like Brampton or Gretna [PAUSE], and somehow [EMPHASIS]  we\rquote 
ve got to try and bring helms to that community.  Whether agriculture will provide them in the future I don\rquote t know.  The farmers are being told to diversify, and of course a number of farmers have diversified.  I mean we\rquote 
ve got the best bed and breakfasts in the country up at P, and we\rquote ve got one of the best in the county up at P as well, and they are very successful.  In fact, they\rquote 
ve become the main businesses [PAUSE], farming is secondary, but they both still farm.  But of course everybody is now talking about going bed and breakfast, and there isn\rquote t the capacity 
for this sort of thing to happen.  So people are trying, and thinking about diversifying [PAUSE]   whether they will or not I don\rquote t know.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 The idea about sustainable farming within Cumbria, from}{\f0\insrsid1266775  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 traditional hill farming to small mixed farms.  I know I\rquote ve s
poken to some farmers who feel that actually because agriculture only represents three per cent of the UK economy that somehow they\rquote re being forgotten, that they are seen as a bit of a burden on the Government?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes.  But they have now shown very clearly the relationship between farming and tourism.  
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Yes, that\rquote s an interesting point isn\rquote t it.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 So that\rquote s an interesting development.  Now in our area we haven\rquote t a lot of tourism [PAUSE AND CHUCKLE], they\rquote re trying to develop the tourist potential in Longtown, but there aren\rquote t\'85
 I get quite worried [PAUSE], I think we\rquote re trying to go down some roads which are not going to be very successful.  I\rquote d rather strengthen and community and try various avenues and see where we go from
\par  there [PAUSE] but it\rquote s not going to be easy.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 No, no.  I mean I think it\rquote s interesting isn\rquote t it, the whole business of sustainability, and if you look at the geography of Cumbria, it\rquote s so interesting because you\rquote 
re talking about communities ten miles apart, being very, very different.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 They\rquote re going to have to keep the Central Lakes farmed because the sheep keep the scrub forest down and if you got rid of the sheep in the Central Lakes you\rquote d end up with a scrub forest and people wouldn\rquote 
t be able to walk on the fells.  So the whole of the Lake District is probably going to be alright because they\rquote ll probably subsidise sheep farmers there.  So they\rquote 
ll be alright but the perimeters going to have a problem, because the farms are twice as big but they\rquote re still not producing the sort of profit they were some years ago.  The farmers\rquote  markets and things like that, these are the things we
\rquote ve got to encourage.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 So what do you think of the idea of having farming cooperatives?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 I think it\rquote s very important.  There\rquote s the \rquote Fell Sheep\rquote  (local meat coop
erative], and I think the farmers have got to develop cooperatives and then their own little abattoirs.  I mean the big abattoirs was another problem, and they\rquote ve got to go for quality for quality products, and they\rquote 
ve got to cut out the profit that the middle men are making}{\b\f0\insrsid1266775  }{\f0\insrsid1266775 from the animal on the land to the piece of meat in the butcher shop.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 And I suppose you\rquote ve then got to educate the consumer to want quality?
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775  
\par They\rquote ve got to learn, yes.  Well it\rquote 
s up to. . . [pause]. . . . our society to start to say, you know, what do we want from our society.  Are we prepared to pay a little bit extra to sustain work in our communities.  The alternative is that we\rquote 
re just going to get people moving into cities and towns and the rural life will go.  So yes, it\rquote 
s going to be happening but we have to rethink, are we prepared as a nation to subsidise agriculture, which I think we should, in order to maintain the quality of life on the land [PAUSE]  and not this busin
ess farming, you know, the kind of agri business farming, where they are farming for the subsidy and not for the animals.  }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 
\par 
\par Do you feel that anything positive came out of the foot and mouth outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 [PAUSE]  Yes for a while [EMPHASIS]    it pulled [EMPHASIS] the community together [PAUSE].   We got very strong; we got a very strong community life, especially for things like the \lquote revolution\rquote 
.  But the community did pull together and felt it together, and was trying [EMPHASIS] to do things together, and they\rquote re still doing, [EMPHASIS] trying to do things together.   We\rquote 
ve not lost sight of this vision, that Longtown can be a better place to live and work if we can find if we can find the businesses and what have you to go.  So that\rquote s what\rquote s good that\rquote s come out of it.  It wouldn\rquote 
t have happened, well it might have still happened but it wouldn\rquote t have happened so quickly, because farming was already suffering very badly but the businesses associated with farming were doing quite well.  I mean A\rquote s haulage were 
doing quite well shifting sheep up and down the country and J\rquote s chemist were doing very well and Ps feed mill  but they\rquote ve all gone down very [EMPHASIS] quickly.  So yes, I think it\rquote 
s pulled the community together and that could be a good thing if we can hold on to it in the future.  Perhaps getting some of this money out to the needs of the community.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 In terms of the role of the church in rural communities,
\par have you anything to comment on that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775  Yes, well it\rquote s either dying [LONG PAUSE],  yes, Nichol Forest is struggling. It\rquote s  WI,  as my Vicar said, it\rquote s a testerone free zone, it\rquote 
s all women, are trying to hold something together, and that is a problem. I mean six or seven people of the church, and they struggle [EMPHASIS].  A few people are struggling to keep the church going.  Kirkandrews on Esk , there\rquote 
s a lot of wealthy people go to that church, and because we\rquote re very traditional we attract a whole range of landed gentry from the whole of the South of Scotland, from Langham to Annan.  That will survive if it keeps that traditional\'85
 I mean 1662 is modern at Kirkandrews.  They like  [EMPHASIS]   the traditional services and they like [EMPHASIS]  the tradition, they like [EMPHASIS]  the non commitment to the church because there\rquote s no Church Hall and there\rquote s no\'85
 so they will quite happily put twenty pound notes in the collection plate on Sunday.  So that is doing alright.  Longtown is surviving at the moment [EMPHASIS], but we\rquote 
ve just had a Lent course and I gave a talk the other night, and then somebody els
e gave a talk the other night, I mean, I think I was the youngest person there [PAUSE]  so I think the average age there was about 75.  Longtown will [EMPHASIS]  survive because people want it to survive, and It\rquote s a lovely church, it\rquote 
s a big old church. but I don\rquote t think it will\'85 it will have [EMPHASIS]  to rethink where it is going in the future [PAUSE], which is where there is a big advantage for E that I\rquote 
m leaving, because he can now start to rethink where he wants to go [PAUSE],  and I can take a bit of a break.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 Is there anything that I haven\rquote t asked you that you would like to add?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1266775 No. No, I think just to recognise the important difference of Longtown compared to Gretna and Brampton, and that Longtown was a one industry town and has suffered  greatly b
ecause of this   and it was struggling before that and somehow we\rquote ve got to make it work in the future [PAUSE]  but a very rewarding place and lovely people.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid1266775 J was thanked for his time.
\par }}