{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 
Body Text 2;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 header;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}
{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid87616\rsid928669
\rsid1122034\rsid2257502\rsid6886762\rsid7760710\rsid11103587\rsid13385159\rsid14691879}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy11\hr14\min40}{\version7}{\edmins16}{\nofpages28}
{\nofwords11203}{\nofchars63862}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws74916}{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701
\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot928669 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid87616 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid87616 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid87616 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid87616 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid87616 
Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     }{\insrsid928669 Lancaster University}{\insrsid87616 
\par Diary ID:       PM23                                       
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs18\insrsid87616 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid1122034 1}}}{\cs18\insrsid87616 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid87616 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\ul\insrsid87616 Information about diarist
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Date of birth: 1965
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 4}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid87616 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid87616 \chftn }{\insrsid87616  }{\b\insrsid87616 
Group 1 }{\insrsid87616 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid87616 Group 2 }{\insrsid87616 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid87616 Group 3 }{\insrsid87616 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid87616 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid87616 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid87616 Group 5 }{\insrsid87616 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid87616 Group 6 }{\insrsid87616 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid87616 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\fs24\insrsid87616 Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard \s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 18}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 As I look back on Monday 18}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616  February that a year ago to the day, FMD had not yet been diagnosed (although it was obviously incubating \endash 
 Little did we know what was about to come and how many lives particularly in Cumbria it was going to affect and more importantly the numbers of livestock destroyed in the mass slaughter.
\par 
\par Wednesday 20}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616   February
\par A year to the day the disease was diagnosed.  The national and regional news has also picked up on this.
\par 
\par Friday 22}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\fs24\insrsid87616  February
\par Saw a picture in a newspaper of one of this year\rquote s new born lambs and one of last year\rquote s.  Last year\rquote 
s lamb was covered in mud as a result of sheep not being able to be moved due to livestock movement restrictions.  I felt sadness at seeing this picture again.  Not only did many of last year\rquote s sheep have to endure har
sh conditions due to movement restrictions, they were then eventually culled.  My thoughts then turned to the 80 ewes in lamb which I had to look after last March, although not living in mud they and their lambs ended up being culled.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 25}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
The thought of another outbreak of foot and mouth is quite a shock as it is exactly a year ago as new cases were springing up and rapidly increasing, especially as farmers are restocking (my brother included).  Another outbreak would be the last 
straw for many farmers and would they get any compensation a second time around and payment for cleaning and disinfection. If not them many would go out of business causing further decline to rural communities and what would happen to locally grown food p
roduction. These are the questions that come to mind at the thought of another outbreak of foot and mouth.  It is therefore a relief that the results of the scare in Yorkshire are negative.
\par 
\par At work this week I see some lorries drive towards Gt Orton}{\cs20\fs24\super\insrsid928669 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs20\super\insrsid928669 \chftn }{\insrsid928669  Large burial site for FMD culled livestock}}}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
.  They are like the lorries that took carcasses to the site last year. The thought of them transporting carcasses does go through my mind and I do drive past the disposal on my way home from work out of curiosity to 
see what is happening to the site.  Earthworks are going on but as far as I can see no disposal of carcasses thankfully.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning 4}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 As it was this time last year that FMD was beginning to get out of control in the country one cannot help and think about events of march 2001.
\par 
\par Although I do not dwell on this I do think about it everyday.  It does not affect my work but because FMD affected my life and a lot of the lives of the people I know, I find this unavoidable.
\par 
\par Sat 9}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Past one of farms where I was a field officer.  Visit them sometimes to see how they are getting on as they told me I could drop in and see them anytime.
\par 
\par Sun 10}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Trying to write account of last year. Got to the bit in last march when I looked after the lambing ewes. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning 11}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Tues 12}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par A fellow former DEFRA field officer called me about a DEFRA reunion.  Year exactly since my brother had a suspect FMD case
\par 
\par Fri 15}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par While taking my dog for her morning walk, it is a year ago I could see pyres along that very walk.
\par 
\par As FMD was such a dominant force in our lives it is impossible not to reflect each day (even if it is just a moment) on some of the FMD related events that 
occurred last year  - especially to those that took place exactly a year ago as the virus had spiralled out of control and was beginning to plague North Cumbria.  It was during this week last year that my brother called the vet out to his cows as he had s
p
otted symptoms that may have been FMD. |It wasn't as it turned out to be ?  However all of the cattle were tested and minor lesions were found in the mouths of some calves which the vet thought might be FMD though other than that the calves were fit and h
e
althy.  My brother and family could not leave the farm and anyone from outside was forbidden to enter while he awaited the results which took 12 days.  The whole family was on a knife's edge during that time.  He could not look after the sheep as it meant
 going on the road which I volunteered to do.  They were 80 ewes which were beginning to lamb.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 18}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par From a personal point of view the foot and mouth crisis was at its peak exactly a year ago as the family farm was officially declared an 'infected premises' and the slaughter of the livestock . Up until Saturday 24}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{
\fs24\insrsid87616  March 2001, my brother was awaiting for the results from the tests taken on his cattle.  The longer we waited (12 days in total) we began to feel optimistic that the result
s were negative though on the  downside more cases were being confirmed each day. , many being farmers we knew of.  The sheep I was taking care of were beginning to produce health lamb. One case in particular had produced triplets all of which were fit an
d healthy.
\par 
\par Then at the week-end, FMD was confirmed and the following day was the slaughter.  Therefore there was a lot of reflection to events this time last year. 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 25}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Thursday 28}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Went to a farm today with an Environmental Advisor which had been an 'Infected premises'.  Restocking had started but did not see the stock.  Later that day called in to see a farm where I was field officer.
\par 
\par Friday 29}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Went to another farm with an Environmental Advisor which had had its sheep culled and still had not restocked.
\par 
\par Still quietly reflecting on last year's events.  Exactly a year ago my brother's cattle had now been slaughtered but were lying in the farm buildings waiting to be picked up.  They were there for 11 days. On Thursday 28}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{
\fs24\insrsid87616  march 
I called in to see a farmer who I was Field Officer for during cleaning and disinfection as I was passing by.  It was nice to see him and his mother again who invited me in for a cup of tea.  He still has not restocked though he had in some sheep of anoth
e
r farmer which were grazing the field along the farm. The farmer had been on holiday to Australia and New Zealand in February and was very glad of the break.  The farmer was going to Yorkshire on Saturday to look at new livestock. He is still not sure whe
ther to go back into milk or not.  His mother would like him to do so as the farm has always been a dairy farm and it was her late husband who had built up the herd
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning Monday 1}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 st}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 I will have a few moment's reflection on last year's events
.  A year ago my brother's cattle were still lying where they had been slaughtered.  For my family the FMD war was over. We were defeated. Meanwhile the war was going on with neighbouring farmers and in other parts of the county with FMD.
\par 
\par I have also felt
 a bit depressed as I don't know when my new job; Environmental Adviser' for Farm Link is going to start. I have been out with an Adviser 3 times and he says I would be ok for the type of work. I am therefore anxious to start.  I am feeling bitter as ther
e
 is all the money in the rural recovery fund to help rural Cumbria and rural economy yet my future seems so insecure as ever.  Will I go on doing casual work in market gardens and farms (in normal circumstances) for the rest of my life.  When I was a fiel
d
 officer although to begin with I found the job stressful, but it was challenging and I felt I could use some of my potential which I yearn to do.  I also found the social side of the job rewarding as I worked in a good team and I got on well with my farm
e
rs.  I am however just feeling bitter and twisted and I am just being impatient.  The rural recovery fund does not owe me anything. I just want my job to start, I need a challenge and I am just feeling frustrated.  'I need a challenge'.  When |I feel depr
essed my perspective is altered but when I'm ok (which is believe it or not most of the time) my perspective is more logical and I hope not selfish.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 8th April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 A better week.  My job, an Environmental Adviso
r has started. I attended a meeting on Thursday and my first farm at the week-end. I just hope I can carry out the work successfully.  The first farm 'Farm Link' gave me to do was my brother's farm as they know that I know the farm well and it would be an
 easy farm to start with.
\par 
\par Speaking to my brother and sister-in-law about FMD, they say they would never want to go through such an ordeal again and they say things won't be the same again, a completely different herd for a start.  I think FMD did take its 
toll on them. They developed colds and flu which they could normally shrug off but this year their bugs linger on.
\par Each day I still reflect on the events of last year regarding FMD.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 15th April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 This week is the best that I have had 
for sometime.  The reasons for this must be that I have started my new job as an 'Environmental Advisor' with with Farm Business Advisory Service and it seems to have started well.  Another reason is that it is spring, buds and leaves are beginning to com
e out, the weather has been better and there is more livestock about.
\par A year ago I was not so aware of spring coming as I am this year.
\par I still quietly think of events this time last year.  Pyres had stopped being built due to potential health risks but the cull continued.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 22nd April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Weds 24}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Visited a farm at Warcop in my job. They were taken out in the cull
\par 
\par Fri 26}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Another farm visit.  Farmer not restocking. Letting land and going to develop buildings.  He prefers his new life post FMD.
\par 
\par The job is going all right. Visited 2 farms, one taken out in the cull, another as infected premises.  First farm at Warcop is planning to restock, the second is not, the farmer prefers his new life and does not miss farming.
\par Towards the end of the week have begun to feel tired. I don't know why. Maybe it is because the job is new and I am about to move into a flat (my own space which I have definitely wanted). At the week-end I have felt drained of energy.
\par Each day my thought about FMD go through 
my mind. This time last year I had become a vaccination , or rather would have been if the Governmetn had not been frightened to make the decision to go ahead with it.  We were all waiting on standby.  I carried my mobile phone with me everywhere (I didn'
t normally).
\par My family had a double blow last year as well as FMD my uncle was seriously ill with cancer and my aunt at this time also diagnosed with the disease and their 
\par daughter has ME!  I know their illness has nothing to do with this research but for 
me personally it was all interconected with FMD.  They had been involved with the farm (though not for quite a while) they live in the area on the edge of Carlisle and I was spending a lot of time with them doing what I could for them e.g. the garden, tak
ing them to hospital, shopping etc.  I remember the stench of burning flesh from the pyres when doing the garden. The duration of their illnesses corresponded with FMD. 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning Monday 29}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Friday 3}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Carried out Environmental assessment on a farm.  Farmer restocking.
\par 
\par I am feeling very tired this week, more tired than usual. My part-time job at the market garden/nursery has at times been a strain.  The tiredness is worse some days than others.
\par On Friday 3}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{\fs24\insrsid87616  May I picked up the keys of the flat I am moving into and I started moving things in over the week-end.
\par I think the tiredness may be due to a combination of several things, the new job, moving into the flat, plus my other part-time job on the market garden (this job is quite flexible) and I 
visit my cousin and help her when I can, usually every week-ed.  My cousin who I mentioned in my previous diary has MR and last year lost both parents to cancer.  My Aunt and Uncle were people I admired a lot and their illness as I mentioned last week coi
n
cided with FMD.  My Uncle had been diagnosed the previous year (2000) first as prostate cancer but this spread to the bones.  Doctors gave him 3 years but in reality he had 18 months.  Then about March 2001 my Aunt had difficulties swallowing. At first Do
c
tors thought it was cancer of the oesophagus but it turned out to be the lung.  They were both determined to fight their illnesses and not to give in and also looked to alternative therapy that included diet, relaxation, thinking etc.  They also never com
plained about ailments and were always cheerful.  They were in fact an inspiration to us all.  (}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 M}{\fs24\insrsid87616 y uncle) had a rapid deterioration last year and died on June 13t}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 h.}{
\fs24\insrsid87616   }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 (M}{\fs24\insrsid87616 y Aunt) throughout the summer remained herself.  It was difficult to realise she was ill.  During }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [uncle\rquote s]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
's last few days she would go to the hospital, have her chemotherapy, go home and go immediately to the hospice to see }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 . She took }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [him]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 out of the Hospice and he died at home.  In September she was told the chemo had not worked which was a great disappointment to her and from then onwards there was a rapid decline in her health until she died on November 23}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{
\fs24\insrsid87616 .  Though she never gave in.  Even in November she was saying she was going to get better. I still go and see to the garden and she how (their daughter/my cousin) is.  She has been very strong throughout this difficult phase.
\par Back to FMD nothing really to speak of apart from daily momentary reflections of what was happening a year ago i.e. more reported cases and my work as a FMD officer.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Tuesday 7}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Met a fellow field officer today.  She is still employed by DEFRA.  She had gone on to re-instatement and is now measuring lagoon sites.
\par Saturday 11}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 Visited a farm today which did not get FMD. However they have got so fed up of farming and had such a lot of restrictions during FMD - they have had enough and decided to give up.
\par 
\par Again I am feeling tired this week.  I had two farm visits this week. One is gradually restocking while the other, the family a
re giving up farming and had just sold the dairy herd. They had got fed up of farming and although they did not get FMD while all their neighbours did, the restrictions that had been imposed during the outbreak had been the last straw.
\par My day to day reflections of last year take me back to when I was on vaccination, or being on standby waiting for the call to go out vaccinating which never came.  It was during this week last year that the vaccination was called off.
\par Went to see my cousin this wee}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 k}{\fs24\insrsid87616 . Her Aunt had been sent to hospital.  Which was around the same time this time last year that }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  (}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 cousin
\rquote s}{\fs24\insrsid87616  father) was in hospital. Taking }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [her]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  to visit her Aunt was a strong reminder of last year.  As my Aunt and Uncle and FMD were the two major things directly affecting my family.

\par The other event this week was meeting a fellow field officer who had worked in the same team as me.  She is still with DEFRA and is mapping lagoon sites which will be recorded by satellite.  It was nice to se her again as I liked h
er.  I remember I had once been stressed by an issue until she said, '}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 D}{\fs24\insrsid87616 on't worry about it, the whole fxxxing job is mental.' I felt reassured after that and did fe
el better. She said that at DEFRA it was just a mundane job now and wasn't enjoyable anymore.  She like me had found the job very sociable and had enjoyed meeting new people but now most of these people have gone. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 13}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Nothing much to report this week. Still feeling tired though I don't think my tiredness has been quite as bad this week.
\par Did three farm visits this week - all had had FMD - two farms had started restocking.
\par My }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 's Aunt was now out of hospital.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 20}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 It was during this week this time last year I started my work as a Field officer with DEFRA.  It was on Tuesday 22}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 may 2001 that I had started.  We were given one day's training then I met the Field Officer who I was taking over from wh
o showed me most of my farms and then I was on my own. I was quite nervous about the job and had felt that I hadn't taken in half the stuff I was supposed to have as we had been swamped with information.  I didn't like the idea that I would be throwing my
 
authority around on farms, but in reality it wasn't like that as I had good relations with farmers which I believed was an important part of the Field officer's job and most Field officers did have good relations with their farmers, though I don't deny th
at there were Field officers  who deliberately threw their weight around but there were I believe in the minority.
\par 
\par The job did have its difficulties.  There was one farm which did become difficult and unfortunately relations did eventually turn sour but th
at was one farm out of ten.  There were other difficulties with bureaucracy, lack of communication with different departments, red tape and paperwork going missing to name but a few.
\par 
\par I have still been feeling tired this week and have been doing less work at the market garden as a result.  I'm gradually getting more settled in my new flat.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 27}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Reflections on last year on my work as a field officer.  This time last year  I was working all hours and in the little time I had off was visiting }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 
[aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and helping out if I could. I don't know where I got the energy from as a year later I feel so lethargic.
\par Events this week; }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 's Aunt died. The third death within a year and it is nearly a year since }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [her father]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  died.  }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [Cousin]}{
\fs24\insrsid87616  is facing up to things remarkably well. 
\par 
\par My job is going well .  Had a pleasant visit to a farm in Appleby, Soulby area (the Penrith Spur) got on very well with the farmer who was now restocking following FMD. He had managed his grassland very well despite the lack of grazing by livestock
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 3}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  June HOLIDAY
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 10}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616   June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 This has been quite a busy week with work.  Two farm visits, a meeting plus my work on the market garden - busy with bedding plants.
\par 
\par The farm visits were in the Appleby area.  The visit I had on Monday, I got stuck in the most horrendous traffic jam.  It took me 3 hours to travel the 3 miles from the ? roundabout (Wigton Junction) t
o Penrith on the M6. The motorway was closed on Shap due to a lorry that had turned sideways and was blocking both the north and southbound carriageways.  
\par 
\par This time last year I was really busy with my work as Field officer and my thoughts turn back to that period.  The job was quite stressful then and it was at its busiest.
\par 
\par Also this time last year my Uncle died, on June 13}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616  a Wednesday.  The bone cancer had finally got him.  His wife was having chemotherapy though you would never believe it to see her 
as she carried on as normal and the main priority being her husband and not herself.  The two big events on my family were at their peak.
\par 
\par I saw }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 cousin}{\fs24\insrsid87616  (}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 their}{\fs24\insrsid87616  daughter) this week, she was fine considering it wasn't a fortnight ago since she had buried her Aunt (}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 her mother}{
\fs24\insrsid87616 's sister). }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  does not like going to the cemetery and feels closer to her parents in her garden as it had been their pride and joy and it is more cheerful and tranquil place.
\par 
\par This has been a week of reflection
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 17}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616   June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Very much an average week this week.  Had my meeting with C}{\fs24\insrsid2257502  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
on Monday. Explained to her that I had been feeling very tired lately over the past 2 months.  I was interested to know that everyone else like me have daily reflections on the events regarding FMD and of what they were doing exactly a year ago.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par On Wednesday I went on a farm walk organised by FWAG (Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group).  The farm had restocked.  FMD had greatly affected the management of the land due to lack of grazing and as always FMD came up in discussion regarding ?
\par 
\par Met people who I had not see for several years, who had asked wha
t I  had been doing, my role in FMD came up in the conversation.  FMD had of course affected their lives also although they were not connected with farming, they were unable to do a lot of their countryside work due to FMD restrictions.
\par 
\par On Friday I received a phone call from Paul, a fellow field officer asking me if I was going to a DEFRA event the following Friday (28}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 June).  I would be going in the morning to a meeting where all staff who had worked there would be invited.  In the evening there would b
e a BBQ which I would not be going to as I have organised a college reunion for the same evening which I arranged weeks ago.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 23rd  June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 An average sort of week again. Still feeling tired.  The main event of the week regarding FMD was the D
EFRA meeting on Friday morning.  Each department spoke on its role in FMD and more or less congratulated itself on how 'wonderful' it performed.  It was almost amusing hearing some departments, particularly general licensing where some members of staff di
d
 not see the urgency of certain licences, particularly the spreading of dirty water, though to be fair there were some very helpful staff in the licensing department and they did have to work under pressure.  The presentations of some departments I though
t were a bit misleading.  After the presentations I went and looked at the displays of each department.  The whole get together was a finale.  The end of FMD.  
\par 
\par All the results of each department were set out in a graph, e.g. the numbers of staff employed 
throughout the year., the rate of which farms were signed off, the numbers of infected farms throughout the year etc.  The event seemed to tie everything together before the final curtain came down on FMD.
\par 
\par I was a little disappointed at first that I did n
ot see many people I know, but as the morning passed I saw several people.  I enjoyed chatting to them again.  Some were still at DEFRA, they had been helping with the filing or the re-instatement and some would be finishing that day.  Other people had le
ft before I did but had come back t see former colleagues again.}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 1}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 st}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 I have felt a little depressed this week.  I don't know why.  The highlight of the week was my farm visit to Nateby.  The farm had got FMD about a year ago.  T
hey had tried their best not to get FMD with rigid bio-security but alas they caught it.
\par 
\par They were very pleasant people and are looking forward.  They have put FMD behind them. They would not like to go through anything like that again.
\par 
\par 
\par They have started to restock with sheep and are wanting to enter Countryside Stewardship.  The farm has some attractive wildlife habitats which the farm cares about so I hope they are accepted.  They are an inspiration by the way and they are positive.

\par 
\par On the downside I 
spoke to a farmer on the phone to try and arrange a farm visit but he had been told by Nestles that they would come to collect his milk as from next April and he was now trying to find a new buyer.  He had my sympathy as he is currently rebuilding his dai
r
y herd and if he is not able to find a buyer he said he would give up farming.  He desperately wants to carry on.  If he can carry on in milk, he will have an 'Environmental Unit'.  He told us to call again in 2 weeks as he may have found a buyer. One won
ders what he will do if he can't find a buyer as farming must be his life. I hope he is successful. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 8}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Nothing really stands out this week.  Still feeling a bit tired though it does wear off throughout the day.
\par 
\par I still have my daily reflections on the events of last year.  FMD is quite a milestone.  As farmers reassess their farm business, it is difficult for one to see how thinks will work out.
\par 
\par  
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 15}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Nothing much to say this week.  Everythi
ng is average. I know stating everything is average is not very imaginative and can everything really be average.  Well truthfully for me it is, nothing is totally bad but everything is not wonderful either.  I'm just plodding on as usual.  I have not bee
n as tired as I have been so I suppose that is a good thing. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 22nd July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Work is going well.  I got 2 farm visits this week.  One of the farmers was a bit sceptical about the Rural Recovery Fund and where the money was going.  I decided I wou
ld 'bite the bullet' and just go and book my holiday.  I have been 'umming and arring' and making excuses not to do this for ages, although until fairly recently I could not even be bothered to think about holidays.  I am going to Egypt.  It is a country 
I have wanted to visit for a long time.  It is for 2 weeks. I will see the famous sites, sail on the Nile and go to the Red Sea. The travel company have my bank details and have taken the money so I can't back out of it now.  I have to go!
\par 
\par I feel relieved that I have booked the holiday and I am looking forward to it.
\par 
\par I still think briefly of events last year each day but do not dwell on it as much.  I suppose life has to move on.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning Monday 29}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 A reasonable week though like everyone else I get a bit fed up with the weather. If we get any nice days we always seem to pay for it by a few days torrential rain.
\par 
\par 
\par Had a nice visit to a farm in the Penrith area.  They have restocked and gone on carrying on with the dairy cows.  They have diversified with B+B and in one field which was permanent pasture have created a scrambling track for bikes.
\par 
\par I went to see my brother at his farm this week. They all seem well but are fed up with the weather as this seems to be upsetting everyone, especially farm
ers as they want things to go back to normality but the bad weather is creating another abnormal year as there are no set seasons for silage, hay and harvest.
\par 
\par My brother has completely restocked but has not gone back into milk.  They are getting used to t
he new stock and the new stock with them.  The slaughter last year was very much the end of an era as much of the breeding lines had been on the farm for forty years but they are glad to have stock back.
\par 
\par Health wise this week has been ok.  In the evenings I have gone for walks or to the pub.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 5}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  August
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 A fairly average week.  Good relations with work and family.  Nothing out of the ordinary in those areas of my life.  Had my inoculations for my trip to Egypt this week.  There were against polio, t}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 yp}{
\fs24\insrsid87616 hoid and Hep. A.  Felt slighly off colour in the evening
 but was not ill. However later in the week started feeling tired again, had aching shoulders, headache and was of my fod.  I think it is a virus as there seems to be one going round at the moment.  I therefore did not do much in the evenings, however I d
id go and see }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  on Saturday as I always do.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 12}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616   August
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Quite a good week socially, met all my work colleagues at a team meeting, then in the evening there was a works' outing to Ullswater on the steamer where there was a buffet and wine.  Weather was perfect.
\par 
\par Then at the weekend, went up to Fife to see a college friend who was having a BBQ which is an annual event with her.  I missed the one she had last year due to FMD.  Fife had escaped FMD as did most of Scotland apart from over the Border.
\par 
\par Getting on quite well with my family, well my parents, haven't seen that much of my brothers lately as we are all quite busy.  I saw cousin }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 o}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
n Sunday.  She had had a bad week, this week with her M.E..  Also she had had a disagreement with some unreasonable neighbours.  Under normal circumstances she would not have been t
oo bothered about the situation but these neighbours have been very unreasonable and rude to }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [her}{\fs24\insrsid87616  parents}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 ]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  when they were alive which means the situation is worse.  }{
\fs24\insrsid2257502 [Cousin] }{\fs24\insrsid87616 has some of }{\fs24\insrsid2257502 [mother}{\fs24\insrsid87616 's}{\fs24\insrsid2257502 ]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  temperament so won't let the incident get her down.
\par 
\par I thin
k that I must still have a bug or whatever it is from last week-end or maybe it is the after effects of the typhoid jab as I seem to tire very easily and I am not eating as much as usual.  The latter is not a bad thing as I could do with losing a few poun
ds.  
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning19th August
\par }{\b0\fs24\insrsid87616  Nothing much to write about this week.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 I have had no work this week with Farm Link.  Some of the farmers I have contacted don
\rquote t want environmental assessments done on their farms while others are wanting t0 get on with silage, harvest etc. when the weather is fine.
\par This week I have been working at my friend\rquote s market garden/nursery where I have been tending plants, potting plants and cutting firewood.  The nursery is a friendly place to work and it is quite a nice contrast from writing reports although I don
\rquote t like it so much when all my time is spent there.
\par On the family front, I visited my }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  who has been quite well lately.  She will soon have to leave her parents\rquote  house as her sister and family will shortly be moving there so }{
\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 will be going back to her house in Denton Holme.  My parents have been keeping well although they have been fed up like everyone else by the bad weather this summer.  They must have had a difficult time with FMD alongside the illnesses and deaths of }{
\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 , }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 , my father\rquote s brother and sister-in-law.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning 26}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 August
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
I was able to do a farm environmental assessment this week.  The farm was in the Ivegill area and managed to escape FMD despite all the neighbouring farms goi
ng down.  The farm is on a ridge and interestingly the other farms on this ridge also escaped FMD.
\par Elsewhere nothing much t report \endash  }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  is preparing for her sister coming and moving house.  I hope her health will be okay.
\par I am going on holiday in a week\rquote s time so I am beginning to prepare for that.  It is the first time I have been on a proper holiday for years.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 8}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  September
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 This week I have been working at the market garden and later on in the week setting off for Egypt.
\par I haven\rquote t thoug
ht much about the holiday as it has approached and the thought of preparing for it and travelling to Heathrow has actually seemed like a burden.  It will be the first proper holiday I have been on in years (i.e. a holiday that has been booked and been for
 a reasonable length of time \endash  more than 4 days).
\par On Thursday night I stayed at my parents\rquote  house.  My mother although trying to help irritated me telling me if I had got this and that and to be careful with my money.  Although one has to realise this is on
ly natural for a mother no matter how old their off-spring are.
\par I eventually settle when I get in my car and set off to Kent where I stay with my friend who I met at College.  The following day  get the train to Heathrow and fly to Cairo.
\par I arrive in Egypt
 at about 3.30 am Sunday morning.  The next day I see the pyramids of Egypt, The Sphinx, Cairo Museum and go out to a restaurant in a Cairo taxi which was like stock car racing in the middle of a huge city.  It was great fun though probably I should have 
been concerned.  Anyway for the next 2 weeks, I am on holiday so I will write to you after then.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 2 weeks holiday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 29}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  September
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 I had a great holiday in Egypt and could do the whole thing again.  It is a great place and so interesting and different from here.
\par What was nice when I came back home was that everyone seemed genuinely interested to hear about Egypt.  My parents especially.  It was a plac
e my Dad could related to as he had been there when he was in the army.  My family have a connection with Egypt as my Dad had been there and }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 had first met each other there.  }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  was in the army and }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  was in the Queen Alexander Nursing Corps (QAs).
\par I visited }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 on Saturday in her own home at Denton Holme.  She has not been well lately due to the move which I think has also been triggered by a bit of grieving for her parents as last time she lived there they were both alive. 
 I had a nice chat with her.  I hope she is OK.
\par On Sunday, had a nice day with }{\fs24\insrsid6886762 [friend]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  I had met at College.  She used to live near Kendal but got promotion and now lives in Tonbridge Wells. 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 On the whole an interesting week.  On
 Monday I had a successful farm visit. The farmer's wife seemed a little sceptical about what I was doing but became interested and the visit was a success.  I was shown around by the farmer and his daughter.  The whole family seemed to be looking forward
 at the same time being a little wary.  I wish them well.
\par 
\par The next day I went to a stress awareness training day with Farm Link. I had not given the day much thought   though as the day progressed it did bring to me the problems of stress among the farming
 community. Some of my colleagues had been to farms where they had suspected there were problems under the surface.  The question is how to deal with it without causing offence and making the situation worse.  I suppose it is making victims aware that the
re is help out there. In view of what has happened stress is a big problem among the farming community and with the nature of the job and living often in isolated places some farmers must feel cut off and on their own.
\par 
\par On Friday spent the evening at my bro
ther and sister-in-law's house.  They were interested to hear about Egypt.  Alison is now doing more hours thought still part-time in her job with A1 as having gone out of milk she is not so tied to the farm.  My brother told me of all the people in the a
r
ea who were giving up farming and I was staggered at how many there were.  FMD and the present situation in farming is really causing a major upheaval.  Skilled people are leaving the ?  Families after many generations are leaving their farms.  The family
 farm which produces a high quality product and is skilled at what it does is seriously under threat and does need help.
\par 
\par Although I have no strong allegiances with a political party the Government does need to be understanding and to help.
\par 
\par 
\par I was convinced that }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  was not so well and was unable to see her on Saturday.  It was this time last year that her Mother }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 was becoming ill. However on the Sunday she was much better when I called to see her.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Not much to talk about this week.  Work seems to be going well as are other areas of life.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  also seemed a little better when I saw her on Saturday.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 13}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Not a lot to report about this week. 
 I had 2 farm visits this week.  One on a lowland farm the other to an upland farm in the Caldbeck area.  At the latter I desperately wanted to be of help as the farm is tenamented and recently the father had died  leaving the elderly mother and daughter.
  The daughter has to go out to work in order to get extra income.  I did my environmental assessment, I\rquote 
m not sure whether they will take my recommendations or not.  I saw that they had not restocked with sheep (the cattle had been spared) and were unlikel
y to do so.  A scheme has just been launched to reduce sheep numbers where farmers can sell their sheep quota.  The overall aim of the scheme is to produce environmental benefits, therefore to prevent excessive grazing of commons and rough unimproved or s
emi-improved pastures.  I suggested that the farm sold some quota and they seemed interested and would contact them again.
\par 
\par I\rquote m also busy with my other job at the market garden/nursery.  The most of the plants apart from primroses and pansies have finished 
now as has the fruit and vegetables (apart from cabbages and leeks), the main enterprise now is firewood.  The firewood part of the business seems to expand each year.  So when I\rquote m not doing farm visits, writing reports, I\rquote 
m usually processing wood and doing deliveries.  The only drawback is the wet weather and working in the rain and mud.  
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week beginning Monday 20}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 A reasonable week this week though not much to report.  At the week-end I stayed at the nursery as (the owner) and his family were attending a wedding.  
\par 
\par I went back to the hill farm to fill in the form for the scheme which would allow them to sell sheep 
quota.  I hope that their application will be accepted  as it is farmers like these that really do need help but are very often forgotten about.  We filled the form in though some additional information was needed which was available from the farm\rquote 
s agent.  I prepared an Environmental statement to describe the environmental benefits that would occur from reduced sheep numbers.
\par 
\par Elsewhere with family and friends everything seems fine.     
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week beginning Monday 27}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  October
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Quite a busy week, I had 2 farm visits, both farms were interesting environmentally.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par I have also been in contact with the hill farm where I did the application to sell the sheep quota.  I was disappointed to find out that they were not going to go ahead with the application due to a di
spute in the tenancy agreement and probate.  I explained that if the tenancy agreement changed it could also be changed on the application and the agreement would not be valid until it had been accepted and had the farmer\rquote 
s signature on it.  I also seeked 
(sought) further assurance  on this which confirmed what I thought.  I told the farm that they had nothing to lose by handing in the application as I knew that they wanted to sell the quota, but the application was now with their agent.
\par 
\par I am wanting a new part time job.  I have enjoyed working at the nursery.  In the winter it is always wet , mud everywhere and with all the wood and machinery, potentially hazardous.
\par 
\par It is a year ago since I finished with DEFRA as Field Officer.  During my last 2 weeks I had supervised pyre ash removal .  Some of the pyres had been huge and one still had hot ash.  On some pyres it had taken 3 days to remove all the ash and they weren
\rquote t always the bigger pyre.  It had been the coal which had been used which was of very poor quality even though it had been sold for a high price.
\par Everything seems fine with my family.  }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  seems fine this week although it is a year ago in which her mother }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  was very ill.    
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 10}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  November
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Tuesday
\par Had my monthly meeting with Cathy at home.
\par 
\par Wednesday
\par Attended a Countryside Stewardship meeting with local farmers at Sandforth, Appleby. Work seems to be going okay.  Had an interesting Environmental Assessment where the farm ha a lot of potential.
\par 
\par Friday
\par Did an Environmental Assessment at Newton Arloch.
\par 
\par Saturday
\par Went to see }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 . She seems fine this week.
\par Attended the Remembrance Service by Carlisle Town Hall on Sunday.  I have never attended the service in Carlisle before and I was quite impressed
.  After the service people went to view the wreaths of poppies laid down at the memorial.  I was quite moved at several young people taking their poppies out of their lapelles and laying them down by the memorial so I did the same and then left.
\par 
\par First th
ing Sunday morning I decided to go on an early morning run.  I would like to get fit again. I ran about 4 miles, though not very fast and at times just above walking speed.  My plan is to keep this up though you will see in the weeks to come whether I do 
or not.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 17}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  November
\par Tuesday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Ran 4 miles in the morning before work.
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Thursday
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Ran 6 miles
\par Friday
\par Did an Environmental Assessment.
\par 
\par I'm glad that I have continued with the running and what I did last week was not just a 'one off'.  I'm not ve
ry good at the running i.e. I don't go very fast but it gives me satisfaction that I have done it.  I run in the early mornings at 6.30 am and despite the early dark mornings I have wanted to go out and do it.  It was my plan to start running again back i
n the spring when I first  moved into the flat but I had felt tired and just had no enthusiasm for running.
\par 
\par Work has been a mixture of 'Farm Link' work and the market Garden/Nursery.  Nothing to report here, it goes on as normal.
\par 
\par Other than the running which I am impressed with myself that I have actually kept up (well this week at least) I haven't mentioned much about spare time activities.
\par 
\par I have recently started an evening class in beginners Arabic. I was so impressed with Egyp
t and would like to do more travelling so I decided that I would trey it.  I've started well into term but that doesn't seem to matter as the class is quite 'laid back' and is quite enjoyable.  This class is on Monday evenings. The other class is on Tuesd
ay evening and is Water Colour painting.  This I find relaxing and yu don't have to think, though sometimes you do have to be in the mood as on the odd evening things didn't come right and you can lose enthusiasm but that is not often.
\par 
\par On Sunday I took my 
mother and her friend to Newcastle Airport. She and her friend are going on holiday to Portugal for the week - a well earned break.  I will be staying with my father while she is away to see that he is okay. He won't go away on holiday.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 24}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  November
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Thursday
\par Did an Environmental Assessment. Had a visit from my sister in law Alison.
\par 
\par Friday
\par Had a visit from my sister-in-law.
\par 
\par Sunday
\par Collected my mother and her friend from Newcastle Airport.
\par 
\par This week I have been staying with my father while m
y mother is on holiday in Portugal.  My father is in his mid 70s and is getting forgetful.  My mother doesn't like him being left  on his own while she is away.  Unfortunately he won't go away with her as he won't go abroad though latterly he would probab
ly get too stressed at airports and travel that he probably would not have any benefit from such a holiday.  
\par These days both my parents don't like to drive far and my mother does need a holiday.  She gets depressed by the bad weather and with my father's forgetfulness she has to think for two people and understandably does need a break.
\par 
\par My father has no physical disability and likes walking particularly hill walking which my mother doesn't.  She does like a walk but not strenuous ones.  My father is also a
ble to drive but these days just drives locally and even stays away from Carlisle as he doesn't like the busy traffic.  He likes to go bowling and there is inThursby (where they live) an in-door bowling club which meets at the Village hall which he is a m
ember.  He can never remember when bowling matches are so he takes his diary with him and someone at the club writes in the date when there is a match so that he doesn't forget.  
\par 
\par My mother also left notices in the kitchen of all the things he needed to re
member.  He also gets muddled and stressed very easily and things like mowing the lawn (which isn't very big, are major issues in his life, he even takes washing dishes seriously.  He does like taking our collie dog Meg walking which he gets a lot of plea
sure from.
\par 
\par   Work has been mainly at the nursery. The work is mostly firewood as the growing season is now over and the nursery has had to expand. Therefore in the winter most of the work is processing and delivering firewood.  The firewood business expand
s with each season and supplies a lot of garages with logs and coal and also the big ? for small bags of logs in the North east and even London.  
\par 
\par The week has gone by smoothly.  Met a DEFRA colleague who was a Field officer.  }{\fs24\insrsid6886762 [she]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  is still with DEFRA as one of the few remaining FMD staff though she now only does one day a week. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 1}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 st}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  December
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Tuesday
\par Did Environmental Assessment on a farm near Castle carrock.
\par Thursday
\par Ran 4 miles this morning before work
\par Friday
\par Undertook an Environmental Assessment on a farm at ?
\par Ran 6 miles early morning.
\par Saturday
\par Ran 6 miles first thing.
\par Sunday
\par Took part in 10k road race.
\par 
\par This week I have got back into running again now that I am back at Welton.  I would like to get really fit
 and be able to do fell races but this depends on my stamina, motivation, enthusiasm and level of tiredness in the weeks and months to come.  On some mornings at 6.30am I've got out of bed, done a few basic stretching exercises and gone out running, then 
have a quick bath, some breakfast and then to work.  Work like the previous week has been mostly Farm Link with some work at the nursery.
\par 
\par 
\par It's quite nice to be back at the flat after a week at my parents' house whilst staying with my father though I am glad my mother had had a good holiday as she was ready for her break and it seems to have done her good.
\par 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  has had a bad week with her ME. She is on a gluten free diet so maybe her dizziness and tiredness re to do with this.  
\par 
\par Elsewhere nothing much to report.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 8}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  December
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Tuesday
\par Had an interview with Rural Development Service for post of \lquote Entry level Adviser\rquote  for the \lquote Rural Enterprise Scheme\rquote .  I never like to comment about interviews, even if it goes well, one does not know ?
\par 
\par Weds
\par Did an Environmental Assessment of a farm at Hesket Newmarket
\par 
\par Friday
\par Received a letter about my job interview.  Did not get the job but I was told I had done well and was on the reserve list.
\par 
\par Saturday 
\par My Arabic class was invited to a social evening at our teacher\rquote s house. An enjoyable evening.
\par 
\par Overall
\par Working away doing my Farm Link work and am at the Nursery the rest of the time doing mainly firewood.
\par It is now just over a year since }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s death an
d funeral. It does not seem like a year. It makes me realise that time passes us all in the end and nothing is permanent.  I feel a little ashamed that I was scarcely aware on the exact anniversary of }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\rquote s death and funeral, as usually I am always aware of these dates.
\par Despite this time Ann seems to be coping well, though she will have to vacate her house as it has gone up for sale (her own house, she left her parents\rquote  house as her sister now lives there.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 15}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  December 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Thursday
\par Two meetings at Farm Link \endash  one in the morning, the other in the afternoon
\par 
\par Sat
\par Went to see }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par Overall
\par Quite a busy week at the Nursery with a lot of firewood orders.  Christmas is getting nearer but can\rquote t seem to get motivated as far as Christmas shopping is concerned.  Each year I seem to have less and less enthusiasm for preparing for Christmas.

\par Went to see }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  at the weekend.  I asked her if she needed to go anywhere, she said she would like to go to the cemetery to her parents grave just before Christ
mas. I agreed to take her at the end of next week. 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 22}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  December
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Thursday
\par Training day at Farm Link.  Went late night Christmas shopping \lquote suppose I\rquote d better make a start.\rquote 
\par 
\par Friday
\par My father\rquote s birthday.  The farm Link Christmas lunch
\par 
\par Sunday
\par Took }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  to the cemetery.
\par 
\par Overall
\par Another busy week at the Nursery with the firewood as it gets nearer to Christmas.  Colleagues get tense as machinery breaks down but it get repaired and we get going again.  
\par It has been a better week weather wise, with clear skies and frosts.  Although colder, it is much healthier.
\par 
\par There was a training day at Farm Link, it seemed to be more relevant to Business Advisors rather than Environmental Officers. However the organisation did seem optimistic that more fundi
ng would come for next year and work would carry on.  That evening I went to Carlisle to do late night Christmas shopping.  I took my mother along as there was some shopping she wanted to do.  I didn\rquote 
t get that much done in the way of Christmas shopping.  The most important thing on my mind was my Dad\rquote s birthday present which is on the 20}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 /12}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
.  I got him a book, \lquote The First World War\rquote  with copies of original photographs taken of all the different fronts of the war.  I find the book quite interesting myself.
\par The next morning I got round to my parents\rquote 
 house to give my father his birthday present and had quite a pleasant morning there. I leave late morning as I have to be at Shap Wells Hotel for the Farm Link Christmas lunch. That was quite an enjoyable even
t.  The whole team were there and it was good to socialise with colleagues.
\par The other notable event of the week was on Sunday when I took }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  to the cemetery to her parents\rquote  grave.  }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 got some flowers and we got holly from the garden which we would also put on the grave.  Holly symbolises eternal life.  We also take one of }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s nieces to the cemetery.  We also put holly on }{
\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s Aunt Amy\rquote s grave who is buried opposite }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [aunt]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and some over grandparents\rquote 
 grave which is nearby.
\par 
\par As the year draws to a close it is a time for reflection and FMD has brought great changes to the countryside over the past 2 years.  Many farmers are leaving agriculture, new developments are occurring all over rural Cumbria. The work I\rquote 
m doing is as a result of FMD.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par 
\par Week ending 29}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  December
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Monday
\par Carried out a farm visit and Environmental Assessment.
\par Tuesday
\par Finish my Christmas shopping.  Visited my two brothers and their families.
\par Weds
\par Spent Christmas at my parents house, visited my brothers and cousin.
\par Thursday
\par Went round to }{\fs24\insrsid6886762 [owner]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s house at the Nursery
\par riday
\par Went to Ullswater for the afternoon
\par Sunday
\par Took my mother to my brother\rquote s house.
\par 
\par Overall
\par It has been quite a busy week. On Monday did a farm visit and Environmental Assessment at ?, near Cockermouth. It was quite an interesting visit.
\par On Christmas Eve did the bulk of my Christmas shopping.  Carlisle wasn\rquote t too busy and I knew what I wanted to buy so despite leaving everything to the last minute, things went quite well.
\par I\rquote m a little worried about my mother as she seems a bit stressed. My father is getting very forgetful and she more or less has to think for two people and I suppose when you have this all the time, it must get you down.
\par Evening of Christmas Eve, visited my two brothers and their families, first to B}{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 and S}{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 and their little boy }{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
who was very excited. They were all well.  Had not seen B}{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 for some time as this year our paths had not crossed much, however it was good to catch up.
\par Later on I went up to the farm to see my other brother and his family where all seemed well.  Later that night I attended the midnight Christmas service at Thursby 
Church with my father.  I always like that service, it is always a time for reflection and a time of hope. One always sees people that you never see throughout the rest of the year but only at that service.
\par Spent Christmas with my parents and over the period visited my brothers, cousins, including }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  and friends.  All in all quite a nice Christmas.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 5}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  January 2003
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 30/12
\par College friend visited and stayed over \endash  introduced her to my local friends.
\par 31/12
\par Went down to Suffolk to spend New year with some University friends
\par 1/1
\par Had a good new year
\par 2/1
\par Visited other friends then drove back home.
\par 3/1
\par My Mother\rquote s birthday
\par 
\par I had quite an eventful New Year.  Before New Year a college friend Jo called in to see me on the way to Scotland.
\par 
\par On New Year\rquote s Eve I drove down to Suffolk and spent new year with some University friends.  Stayed with S}{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 and J}{\fs24\insrsid11103587  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
who married 4 years ago and were having a party and had invited a few friends from University.  Theirs is an arable farm and was not affected by FMD.  I don\rquote 
t think there were any cases in Suffolk but being farmers were quite sympathetic to what went on in Cumbria. 
\par After New Year I went on to visit other farming friends in Suffolk Brian and his family.
\par I had stayed at }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [friend]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s farm when I was a student on a College placement.  I did not work on his farm but lodged there.  I actually worked on a Countryside project I the local area.  }{
\fs24\insrsid14691879 [He]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  is an  arable farmer but did have a pedigree herd of Susse}{\fs24\insrsid14691879 x}{\fs24\insrsid87616  cattle.  He had been quite concerned about FMD.  Had along 
drive home, it was wet all the way, not a pleasant journey.  The next day was my mother\rquote s birthday, she seems ok.
\par On the Sunday my brother and sister-in-law (at the farm) invited my parents and I over for lunch.  It was a pleasant day and my parents both enjoyed it which was good.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 12}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  January 2003
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 After Christmas and the New Year it is quite good to get back to normality. Back to work.  Spent Monday and T
uesday at the Nursery processing wood, while the remainder of the week, did my Farm Link work, having done 2 farm visits at Ainstable and Goodhall (near Aspatria).
\par I like the frosty weather, though on Thursday the roads were very treacherous but the frosts are far more healthier than the heavy rain.
\par Both my farmers seem to be getting back on their feet and are both interested in the environmental schemes.
\par Had quite a pleasant week-end with friends.  Visited the lake District, spent the evening in the}{\fs24\insrsid928669  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 pub \endash  a good way to spend the week end.
\par My parents seem to be ok.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 19}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  January
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Work was a good balance between the Nursery and Farm Link.  Had an interesting visit to Great Aerby. The farm had areas of limestone pavement, the farm itself was very old.
\par Other than that a normal week. My car was serviced on Friday.  Stayed over at the nursery at the week-end as ( the owner and who is also a friend) was away.  He has got to know another college friend of mine}{\fs24\insrsid14691879  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 and has gone to see her.  }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [He]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  feels better if there is someone staying on the site, luckily nothing went wrong so everything was alright when he returned.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 26}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  January
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 22/1
\par Not a good day at work \endash  a misunderstanding
\par 23/1
\par Farm visit at Stainmore, weather fine \endash  a good day
\par 24/1
\par Farm visit to Great Orton
\par 25/1
\par My brother\rquote s birthday
\par 
\par 
\par A mixed week.  Work wise the first half of the week was at the Nursery \endash  mostly preparing wood etc.  On Wednesday I had a falling out Tim the Nursery owner and friend).  It is nothing I really want to talk abo
ut but maybe I have taken things out of proportion.  I hope it is a misunderstanding on my part.  The farm Link side of work good, had two successful visits.
\par On the family side things are going fine.  It was my brother\rquote s birthday. I went round to see him
\par   Everything well there.
\par On the social side things have been mixed.  O the plus side I\rquote m getting to know E, a girl I met at work, quite well.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 2}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 27/1
\par Work meeting at Environment Agency
\par 28/1
\par Farm visits, a friend of my brother\rquote s who was very upset over FMD
\par 29/1
\par Donated blood
\par 30/1
\par Filled in tax return
\par 2/3
\par Went to see }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par Most of the week was spent doing Farm Link work and my tax return. My farm visit was a friend of my brother who I also know quite well. He was badly upset by FMD but is over it now. E}{\fs24\insrsid14691879  }{\fs24\insrsid87616 
came with me on the visit.  Made up with }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [nursery owner]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 , I had hugely over-reacted on a certain issue.
\par Family are ok \endash  went to see }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 , who was on quite good form as she has been under a lot of stress lately as she has had to look for another house which she has now found.
\par Had a quiet week-end, spent mostly with family.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 9}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Wednesday
\par Visited a farm at Watermillock
\par Friday
\par Farm Link Farm meeting, met Cathy.  Realisation that it is nearly 2 years since the first recorded outbreak of FMD.
\par 
\par I have been feeling a little uncertain about the future lately as I do not know how long my job with Farm Link will last, due to funding.  I, on the whole, like the Farm Link work.  Sometimes I think I am doing a good j
ob, other times and to some farmers I think I\rquote m telling them what they probably know already.  In these circumstances I feel I have little purpose.  A job as well as providing me with an income must have a sense of purpose.  I don\rquote 
t feel like this all the time about my farm link work, I feel at times I am doing a reasonable job and I am providing useful information and have got the farmer\rquote s interest.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 16}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Monday
\par Wrote up reports.  Filled in job application form.
\par Tuesday
\par Went on a farm visit to Watermillock
\par Friday
\par Worked at the market Garden
\par Saturday
\par Went on a farm visit to Kirby Thore.
\par 
\par A reasonable week, not too busy. Had a couple of farm visits. Spent one day at the Nursery. The rest of the time either wrote up farm report or filled in job application forms.
\par I don\rquote t know how long the farm link work will go on so I have to look around for other jobs. Filling in job application forms is a thing I hate.  I find it tedious a
nd in the past, I have filled in so many of these forms to no avail, otherwise the rest of my week was reasonable. We went out on a Valentine\rquote s date.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Monday 23}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  February 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Went to the Farm Link office.
\par Wednesday
\par Visited Carlisle
\par Thursday
\par Went on an interesting farm visit to the Newlands Valley
\par Saturday
\par Went to Suffolk via Bedford, have been invited to a Christening by 2 University friends
\par Sunday
\par Attended a Christening
\par 
\par Not such a busy week, finished off filling in my job application forms, writing reports etc. and went on a very interesting farm visit to the Newlands Valley.  It was a long visit and took all day to do the survey, but it was interesting.
\par 
\par At the weekend went down to Suffolk as two University friends were having their second child christened.
  I went to Bedford at first where I met another friend from University, then went On to Suffolk. Other friends from University  were also invited to the christening.
\par These friends }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 S and J}{\fs24\insrsid87616 , I had spent New Year with. All in all about 10 people from University turned up so it was a great week-end!  I also met up with }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [their]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 relations. As I was from Cumbria it was inevitable that a few people would ask about foot and mouth and how the farmers were recovering. I mentioned that my brother had restocked and was
 coping ok, though it is a bit worrying for them if they lose their milk quota as that helps with rent payments.  I mentioned the change that had occurred as a result of FMD, such as many farmers open to suggestions on farm diversification, othr farmers l
eaving the industry all together, the traditional buildings being developed into housing and modern buildings being demolished. Other farmers staying in the industry e.g. dairy farmers who are now expanding their herd numbers 
\par due to falling price of milk. Dairy farmers have now got  to produce in quantity in order to be able to survive.
\par It is also the second anniversary of the start of FMD so memories of that time are coming back.
\par All in all a good week-end. Good to see friends again and to socialise.   
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 2}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid87616 No significant event occurred this week and could be claimed as fairly \'93average
\'94.  However thoughts of FMD do come back as it is
 a second anniversary of the outbreak and by the end of February the disease was already getting out of control.  Thoughts do go back to the pyres and my work as a field officer.  During that work a common phrase that I heard was \lquote cover yourself
\rquote  as no-one at DEFRA would take any responsibility of anything going wrong.  No individual or department was prepared to \lquote carry the can\rquote 
. When I first started doing the job I did feel vulnerable as I did not want to be accused of anything that may have a detrimental 
effect of an action  had taken while unaware of any adverse consequences.  I made it my business to mention to my contractors to wear the recovery safety equipment even if they ignored my words I had told them and therefore had \lquote covered myself
\rquote .
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week ending 9}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Did 2 environmental assessments. One was a farm near Aspatria.  The farmer seemed quite interested in what I had to say.  He mentioned the FMD days possibly because it is the second anniversary of the event, which is still fresh in pe
ople\rquote s minds.
\par On my other visit it was to a farmer who I had been field officer to (during FMD).  Although the farm itself was not taken out, a field of outlying cattle was slaughtered and presumably it was only due to lack of resources at the time that th
e rest of the farm had not been taken out.
\par At the time I had sympathised with the farmer as he was in the unfortunate position of having most of his herd on the other side of the road from the main steading and I was unable to graze that land and therefore
 move of. The livestock had to be kept indoors. The farm was also having a problem with vermin as other premises were being thoroughly cleaned out there was no longer places left for vermin except the few premises that had not fallen or completely fallen 
to FMD.  I had tried to get DEFRA to help with the vermin but was told they were unable to do anything as this was still a \lquote clean premises\rquote . I remember talking to the farmer\rquote 
s wife about this and feeling useless as I was unable to do anything yet she was still grateful for the fact that I had tried to do something as on-one had and they were feeling isolated and neglected.
\par It took a while for the field to get \lquote signed off\rquote  as DEFRA seemed to deliberately wait.  The farmer was desperate to have the field back 
to plough.  I had (two words unclear here) to get licences for this farm to make silage on neighbouring fields which had had no livestock on them but as the farm which they belonged to had  had FMD, this was quite difficult.
\par 
\par The farm seems to be recovering now but to expand the dairy herd as the price of milk has gone down -  only large herds are viable.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid87616 
Other parts of my life seem okay.  My family are well apart from the usual ups and downs.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Week ending 16}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 The weather has been good this week an
d therefore most people tend to feel better.  With the good weather I have not really had thoughts on FMD.  This time two years ago I tend to remember the weather being dull, overcast and cold, a contrast to this week when it has been sunny.
\par Had a pleasant farm visit.  The young farmer who I saw was very enthusiastic about wildlife and nature conservation.
\par I am quite content with my personal life. My family seem okay and I have had one or two pleasant evenings in the pub with friends and went walking on the Caldbeck fells on Sunday as it was such a nice day.
\par My }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  moved house this week.  Although the move itself was stressful, she is happy in her new house and feels it is a new start.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 23}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 rd}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 No farm visits this week as the farmers I ha
ve contacted are busy with lambing or working the land and making the most of this fine weather.  Have spent the time working on the nursery which has been quite pleasant doing the planting operations and with this fine weather.
\par Although I have not seen any lambs this year, I am aware lambing is going on, a sharp contrast to 2 years ago when I think of the field of ewes which I had looked after which were beginning to lamb before the inevitable happened.
\par I am quite happy with my personal life, no problems but am a little uncertain about the future as I can\rquote t see my Farm Link work going on much beyond April and therefore to not know what is going to happen career wise.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  Week ending 30}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  March
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 The weather is nice, dry and mild which makes everywhere pleasant. But it is 2 years ago since FMD was at its height, well it was as far as my family is concerned as it is exactly two years ago since the slaughter of my brother
\rquote s livestock (24}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616  march).  At that time I just remember everything being grey, the weather, th
e countryside, everything until this year.  I am aware now that lambing time is taking place and new born lambs in the field are always a pleasant sight to see.  One hopes that the lambs don\rquote 
t go the same way as my lambs did two years ago. It was such a shame as my lambs had been fit and healthy and I will never forget the triplets which one ewe had given birth to and she had accepted each one.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 An average week nothing special to report.  Work was spent on the nursery as it is now p
lanting time.  The dry weather makes everywhere pleasant and must be a bonus for the lambing season. Thoughts do go back to FMD year when the whole area was in the midst of the mass slaughter of livestock.  It would be unthinkable \endash 
 dreadful - - if this year\rquote 
s lambing season went the same way. One still wonders why we never vaccinated against the FMD especially as this operation was fully paid for, i.e. vaccine and equipment purchased, personnel trained and paid for being on stand by -\endash what a waste!

\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week ending 13}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs24\insrsid87616 
An average week in terms of work and everything else, though this mild weather is very pleasant for this time of year.  Even though the future is insecure, the countryside is beginning to look very attractive. New born lambs in the fie
ld are a rewarding sight.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par Week ending 20}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April  
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Much of my work at present is at the nursery as it is planting time, apart from Thursday morning which was the Farm Link team meeting.  Nothing much to report on the work front, though there are fewer fa
rms now requiring environmental audits and I am wondering how I am going to move forward in terms of my career.
\par This spring has been excellent as far as lambing is concerned and on the farm (where my flat is) lambing time is well in progress.  Out of my wi
ndow I can see some fit healthy lambs and it is pleasant going for a walk by the river where there is another field of ewes and lambs.  Lambing time does cast my mind back 2 years ago (FMD year) and the fact that I was lambing. Relieved that this year
\rquote s lambs will not have the same fate as the lambs of 2001.  I still feel a little sadness when I look back to that time.  The new born lambs of that year are a joy to see.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 27}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  April 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Another average week.  We have had some long awaited rain which has been necessary though I hope the weather does not get in a continued pattern of unsettled weather and another fine dry spell returns especially as last year\rquote 
s summer was so wet.
\par I have had one or two walks across the fields. This year\rquote s lambs are doing very well, more lambs have now appeared in the fields as lambing time has progressed.
\par My family and friends are all ok, nothing to report there.  Just a little unsure of the future as farm Link work appears to be getting less and I\rquote m not so sure what to do next and there appears to be few opportunities.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 4}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 A quiet week.  Nothing much happening. I still go to my painting class on a Tuesday evening.  I\rquote m glad this class has continued to the summer. I find the painting relaxing and you can f
orget about your troubles, in my case uncertainty, and just slop a bit of watercolour paint bout on a piece of A3 and even better if the end result is sort of okay and if not, well it doesn\rquote t  matter.  I\rquote 
ve been painting a photograph I took of the souk in 
Cairo while on holiday.  I found this market fascinating. Though on the photograph the narrow street was filled with tourists, so from other photos I took in Egypt I transformed the tourists into Egyptians wearing burkas and jalabads. It has been my own p
ersonal project. I\rquote 
ve started the painting several weeks ago and do a bit each week.  It is the most complicated painting I have ever attempted and is still not finished. The painting I suppose is quite special to me as it is a reminder of Egypt. Will let y
ou know when it is finished.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 11}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Nothing to say. Still in the same situation. Uncertain abut the future. I can\rquote t seem to find a job to fit my experience. Okay I could get some jobs but I have work on the nursery and the odd bit of work at
 farm link and unless it is a job that will stimulate 
\par 
\par 
\par and challenge me, there is no point in going for a mundane job as it wuld not be flexible as the nursery and won\rquote t satisfy me.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week ending 18}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Nothing much to report this week. Still unsure regarding the career front.  Have been working on the nursery.
\par The main event of the week was my ni}{\fs24\insrsid14691879 e}{\fs24\insrsid87616 ce}{\fs24\insrsid14691879 \rquote s}{\fs24\insrsid87616  18}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616  birthday. }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [she]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
 is my eldest brother (the farmer}{\fs24\insrsid14691879 \rquote s}{\fs24\insrsid87616 ) daughter.  During FMF year, }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 [she]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  did her GCSEs
 and the whole FMD year must have been traumatic for her but she is developing well and has a place at Newcastle University.  All my immediate family wee there as well as neighbours and friends.  The whole evening was a success.
\par My }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [cousin]}{\fs24\insrsid87616  however has not been so well.  She has now moved house which she is pleased with but has been having trouble with gall stones on top of her ME.
\par Got a few job applications and CVs sent out. Fingers crossed!
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week Number}{\fs24\insrsid87616 : W/E 25}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\fs24\insrsid87616  May
\par It is two years this week since I just
 started my work as a Field Officer. I remember my first day at work, On arrival we were all issued with mobile phones, then had lectures most of the day before being given our jobs. Nothing like an agent apart from a more personal level. My friend was up
 from Kent for the week so it was good to see her and catch up.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week Number: W/E 30th May}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par Feeling a bit better as the hours have now improved. Up until now May has been a miserable month when it should be the best month of the year. This time two years ago
 I was new in my field officer job and was getting quite stressed with the regulations I had to try and remember and the numerous "grey area" I encounter where I was not sure how the regulations would apply. How could I cope with all this today? I'm not q
uite sure, I take it all in my stride or get stressed again.
\par I went for a job interview with RSPB for the post of "conservation officer" for Cumbria and the Yorkshire Dales. I was quite amazed that I was invited to interview as the RSPB is a popular organis
ation with over a million members and they receive many applicants for jobs they advertise. For the interview I had to give a presentation so I was a little nervous about it. I took the train to Newcastle (RSPB Northern Office HQ) to go to the interview. 
W
hile I was on the train I received another phone call from C in Carlisle inviting me to go for the possibility of getting some work which was coming in. I felt quite optimistic, as if I behaved badly with the RSPB there would be a chance of some more work
.
\par I had done a lot of preparation  for the interview and I knew I would have strong opposition. Even if I did not get the post I wanted to have the satisfaction of giving a giving a good interview and being able to answer the questions well.
\par The interview I
 thought did go well though I was not convinced that I would get the job, especially as I had recognised the name of one of the fellow candidates.  After the interview I had a leisurely walk along the riverside at Newcastle which I thought was quite impor
tant. Nothing else to say, family and friends well.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Week Number: W/E 8}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  June
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 The meeting at the George in Penrith brought back clear memories of 2001 from the initial outbreak. My families farm experiences and of my work as a fie
ld officer. I recalled memories of how desperate people were. One such memory was of a dairy farm, which had, had one field of cattle taken out (while the rest of the farm remained clean). I was field officer for the field site and could only talk to the 
f
armer by phone. The farmer had told me about the problem they were having with the rats far greater than what they had experienced before. Our assumption was (and this is quite plausible) that as premises were being cleaned they were forced out and going 
to premises still free of FMD.
\par I said I would try and get vermin control (a service which DEFRA was giving to farmers) but unfortunately this was only available for infected premises. In the end there was nothing I could do but the farmer was still grateful
 because of the fact I had tried.
\par The other event of the week was an Art exhibition which Llewellyn (taken my watercolour painting down) was going at Great Corby and a number of artists were invited to exhibit some of their paintings. I had 4 paintings whi
ch I was able to put in, 3 of which I have on my walls at home which I did not want to sell for two reasons , one that if I did sell them I would have nothing on my walls and two it took me so long to paint them.
\par So I had only 1 painting to sell but I put 
in a print of the other paintings. I tool my mother with me to the exhibition, as I know she would enjoy looking round. The exhibition went on over the weekend and was a success. Received news from the RSPB about my job interview. I did not get the job. 

\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 Week Number: W/E 15}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  June}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par This time two years ago I was very busy as a field officer and it is the 2}{\fs24\super\insrsid87616 nd}{\fs24\insrsid87616  anniversary of }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [uncle]}{\fs24\insrsid87616 
's death. It was a very eventful and busy time. I remember that I was on the go all the time but time is just passing by and it is becoming more distant. This time last year I was by now well established with my work.
\par This week I have been doing more exam invigilation at Trinity School all day Monday and Tuesday morning. During Monday lunchtime I went to Great Corby to collect my pai
ntings from art exhibition. I was thrilled to bits when I had found out that I had sold 2 paintings. Well 1 painting and 1 print to be precise but someone had wanted to buy one of the paintings that ha a no sale sticker on and I now know I could have sold
 it. The sale doesn't matter, I'm just flattered that someone actually wanted to buy one of my paintings. I personally thought my pictures were awful compared to the others in the exhibition.
\par Rest of the week I worked in the nursery, lifting potatoes, cutting wood, watering plants and on Friday went with (a colleague from the nursery) to the Lake District where there are planted window boxes and hanging baskets around some of the pubs, B&Bs an
d hotels which had bought plants from us.
\par My parents both seem to be keeping well.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs24\insrsid87616 6}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 Another average week and nothing much to report.  Working at the market garden/nursery which is quite pleasant in summer though is not that profitable. However last week I did do an environmental visit of a farm for farm link.
\par 
\par 
\par Relations with my family are good.  On Thursday, took my father to see his sister in Devon for a long week end. Stopped in Exmoor en route to stay a night with my cousin before going on to South Devon.  It is good to see some of the extended family again.

\par 
\par FMD year gets further into the background as it slips into the past but although not always in my mind, these days it }{\fs24\ul\insrsid87616 won\rquote t }{\fs24\insrsid87616 be forgotten.  This time 2 years ago I was extremely busy as a fie
ld officer and throughout the summer other new cases had dropped considerably but they still continued to smoulder on.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24\insrsid87616 13}{\b\fs24\super\insrsid87616 th}{\b\fs24\insrsid87616  July 
\par }{\fs24\insrsid87616 I start the week in Devon as I have taken my father to visit his sister.  The visit seems to be a success as they seem glad t
o see each other and are getting on all right.  They lost their younger brother and sister-in-law during FMD year. The last time they saw each other was }{\fs24\insrsid13385159 [}{\fs24\insrsid14691879 sister-in-law}{\fs24\insrsid13385159 ]}{
\fs24\insrsid87616 \rquote s funeral. }{\fs24\insrsid14691879 We}{\fs24\insrsid87616  have been lucky that the weather has remained fair.
\par 
\par Devon was also badly
 affected by FMD but not on the same  scale as Cumbria and South Devon where I was not seriously affected. However one should not overlook this as the Devon communities which were most affected by FMD would have suffered as much as anywhere. I do recall h
o
w much the national media concentrated on Devon more rather than Cumbria when FMD was at its height. Cumbria was affected about 4 times as much as Devon yet came second by a long way in terms of media coverage.  One would target the most serious affected 
area but that was not the case. I don\rquote t understand why.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid87616  
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
Returned home Tuesday night after a good journey home and spent the remainder of the week at the Nursery. The weather has been pleasant and hot at the week end. On Sunday hired a rowing boat on Ullsw
ater with friend E. It was so hot I just wanted to be near water.
\par 
\par As my diaries draw to a close FMD year is becoming more distant. I don\rquote t know why as it is only 2 years ago and time flies by.  I think it is because it was such an unusual year and unlike 
any other year. Seasons in the farming calendar seemed irrelevant as they did not apply as there was no livestock.
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid87616 2001 sums up inefficiency, irresponsibility, too much bureaucracy, lack of compassion and understanding by the government.  But co-operation
 and team spirit at times in some of the rural  communities. It is vital that a contingency plan is set up so that it could be quickly implemented when requested.  
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid87616 
\par }}