{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f448\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f449\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f451\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f452\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}
{\f453\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Tahoma (Hebrew);}{\f454\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Tahoma (Arabic);}{\f455\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}{\f456\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Tahoma (Vietnamese);}{\f457\fswiss\fcharset222\fprq2 Tahoma (Thai);}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 
heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \fs16 \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden annotation reference;}{
\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 \ssemihidden annotation text;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f35\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden Balloon Text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{
\s22\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext22 Body Text;}{\*\cs23 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 \styrsid15076854 Hyperlink;}{\*\cs24 \additive 
\sbasedon10 \styrsid15076854 page number;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid399300\rsid526264\rsid1081185\rsid2500509\rsid2845720\rsid6165964\rsid7562516\rsid11020451\rsid13448004\rsid15017838\rsid15076854\rsid16132697}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info
{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo8\dy8\hr10}{\revtim\yr2006\mo9\dy12\hr16\min8}{\printim\yr2002\mo5\dy22\hr9\min10}{\version5}{\edmins34}{\nofpages13}{\nofwords5484}{\nofchars31259}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws36670}{\vern16391}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1797\margr1797 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1797\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot11020451 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid399300 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid399300 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid399300 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid399300 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\fs20\insrsid399300 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :
\par Depositor:     Lancaster University
\par Diary ID:       PM40}{\insrsid399300 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid15076854 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs24\insrsid399300 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs24\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid13448004 13}}}{\cs24\insrsid399300 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0\pararsid15076854 {\insrsid399300 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Information about diarist
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Date of birth: 1944
\par Gender: M
\par Occupation: Group 2}{\cs20\super\insrsid15076854 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\fs20\super\insrsid399300 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid399300  }{
\b\fs20\insrsid399300 Group 1 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid399300 Group 2 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Small businesses, to  include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs20\insrsid399300 Group 3 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\fs20\insrsid399300 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs20\insrsid399300 Group 5 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\insrsid399300 Group 6 }{\fs20\insrsid399300 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid399300 
\par }}}{\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\insrsid15076854 Geographic region: North Cumbria}{\insrsid15076854 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 1
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Very busy week as we have been having a new floor put in as a result of getting money from the FMD recovery fund because our turnover wa
s way down when we applied. Obviously this has meant that the FMD outbreak has been brought to mind again. We have had several farmers or their wives in the shop who are optimistic with their restocking although one farmer who is also in the caravan park 
business is not restocking yet. Our farmer friend Alist}{\insrsid11020451 ai}{\insrsid15076854 
r is rushing to restock to a deadline date so that he will be able to claim the sheep subsidy even though he is unsure as to the likely profitability of the job. Good news that the Appleby Horse Fair 
has been given the clearance for June. Last years cancellation caused many businesses including ours to loose much money. Generally still positive about the future year ahead.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 2
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Visited the Upfront Gallery with G. Large oil painting depicting \lquote The Slaughter\rquote 
 not pleasing, but brought to mind the cull again, as we were near Great Orton we decided to drive by the airfield on the way to Carlisle, an eerie quiet there now that created a feeling of unease and sadness when we remembered all the animals slau
ghtered \endash 
 many unnecessarily. We also wondered about the effect of all the lorries going through these narrow roads for so long on the school and all the residents of this small village. Feeling somewhat depressed when I think too much about the past year 
which now seems almost like a bad dream. Visit by I}{\insrsid1081185  }{\insrsid15076854 and interview \endash 
 surprised that talking about the outbreak of last year made me feel quite upset! The all consuming topic of FMD last year obviously had a greater psychological effect on me that I had thought!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 3
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Discussion with farm wife customer whose animals were culled. She spoke at lunch get together with other farmers to discuss FMD but said that she was not interested as she now feels it should be put behind her and look to the future. Discussin
g FMD with people still makes me saddened and angry if discussion goes on too long.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid15076854 Week 4
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
This week sees the anniversary of the first cases and brings back feelings of concern that I had this time last year. Fair bit of coverage on national and local news.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 5
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Worry this week of an outbreak scare in Yorkshire \endash 
 yet again the media blow it all up instead of waiting for the results. Thankfully they prove negative but the media circus out in force. More or less finished the improvements to the shop which
 we did asa result of money from the recovery fund. It has been an extremely busy few weeks. Positive attitude towards the future as always.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 6
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Various T.V. programmes looking back over the FMD crisis, most pointing out the plight of the farming commu
nity but some mention about other businesses. Most farmers I come across seem to be ex}{\insrsid11020451 p}{\insrsid15076854 
anding their milking herds to make a more viable unit or if small getting out. I have mixed feelings about agriculture, but I suppose it\rquote s the general continuance of the progression to larger units and hobby farms.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 7
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Reading Private Eye \lquote Not the Foot and Mouth Report\rquote 
 highlighting the lack of organisation on the part of the government to handle the outbreak, also the misinformation given by the NFU \endash  MAFF/DEFRA conc
erning vaccination. The whole thing has upset me, with the response of what went on re culling the animals and the affect on the farmers involved, just angry again with the chaotic situation \endash 
 what will come out of the three Government Inquiries I wonder? 
Positive approach needed again to wipe this from my mind. Lambing started in some places, so lets hope all goes well for the farmers, still some footpaths closed in the area but hopefully they will be open by Easter \endash 
 can it be a year since it started?
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 9
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Announcement this week that support for agriculture is to change, no doubt this will cause more agro for the farming community. Border T.V. programme followed the life of a calf from birth to slaughter and the trials and tribulations of 2 or 3 farming
 families. Sad to see a Cumbrian family having to sell up the farm. However, the whole question of Government and E.U. support for farming is a huge subject and has gone on since the 1947 Agricultural Act to secure food at reasonable prices for the U.K. a
f
ter the deprivation of food shortages during and after the war. Conservation is the name of the game and no doubt will all hinge around this. The other farming family who were part-time really, struck me (an ex-farmer) as being very inefficient and unprof
essional, little sympathy there really. The final part of the programme showing graphic scenes of the animal being slaughtered and cut up were just in very bad taste, even I could become vegetarian!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 10
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Lambing going on round and about. Farmers seem mu
ch happier that the cycle is beginning again, altogether more up-beat. Took my first walk for a year over fields near by that are stocked, first checking with the farmer that it was ok. Really uplifting to see the ewes lambing and cows calving, also curle
ws, oyster catchers, etc. Easter trade was up on the Saturday, mainly due to the country market that was advertised on T.V. through Spirit of Cumbria money \endash  also fireworks in evening, which drew 2000 + people \endash  pity we didn\rquote 
t have a stall near the river selling things!!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 11
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Busy week in the shop, especially at the weekend. Announcement of more money for Cumbria 
\endash  but not clear if it\rquote s NEW money. Frustrating that most of the money available seems to have to go for projects that have to be thought up and
 acted upon very quickly. Chamber of Trade meeting to discuss amongst other things the success of the market day and the fireworks. T.V. advertising seemed to work, especially for the evening fireworks. Thoughts of \lquote tapping into more money\rquote 
 that could be available plus contributions from businesses to hold another one next year, but also to arrange something for later in the year. I have just got lumbered with organising the buying and erection of bunting for the Jubilee.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 12
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Becoming very irritated by
 Business Link, as I put in the claim for money expended on the I.T. equipment in late Feb, and I still haven\rquote 
t been repaid, they just cannot cope with all the final claims. Suppose the earlier claim for the floor in the shop was paid direct to suppliers i
n about 3 weeks, still hopefully it will get here eventually. Beginning to get to grips with the internet and e-mail! Much to the amusement of friends. Listened to the Radio 4 programme \lquote Costing the Earth\rquote 
. Unfortunately I kept dozing off! But it seemed ra
ther depressing with tales of concerns about seepage from burial sites, although it got over the magnitude of the outbreak. Around Appleby I still feel that there is a positive attitude in general about the current situation.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 The Diarist}{\cs20\super\insrsid11020451 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid399300 \chftn }{\insrsid399300  Newsletter produced by the research team at regular intervals throughout the study }}}{\insrsid15076854  I find interesti
ng and it is encouraging that the Action Group meeting took place with the many representatives of various bodies to hear feedback from your findings to date. The piece on effluent disposal shows that the repercussions from this one site alone would seem 
to be going on far a long time yet \endash  does the tanker journeys each day affect the Great Orton population I wonder?
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 13
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Met local farmer and in the past very active councillor for EDC}{\insrsid11020451 
 (Eden District Council)}{\insrsid15076854 . Although they are restocking they rathe}{\insrsid11020451 r}{\insrsid15076854  enj
oyed the weekends off while they had no stock and are wondering why they are restocking! Trade this week has been rather flat although generally March and April have been much improved on last year and back to normal, mainly due to one or two Border Fine 
Art figurines that have been in demand.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 14
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Speaking to farm buildings erector who has had a very busy year putting up new buildings on farms that have had FMD. He reckons much money has gone into Cumbrian economy through FMD. We have had a busy week, 
a few more visits but mainly local sales. At last received money for IT re FMD recovery! Using computer a bit, but will eventually have to go on a course \endash  still not sure if it\rquote 
s a good thing or not, although e-mail certainly seems very efficient, but the 
use of suppliers web sites not that helpful as yet. Seems more time consuming than looking through a catalogue where the illustrations are better. Have been redesigning the garden \endash 
 gardening  certainly relaxes my mind and is a stress buster. When I was managing the farm in Essex 15 years ago I had a big garden \endash 
 not realising it I think my gardening over the last 20 years there may have helped in relieving my stress levels over the years.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 15
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Attended the Major of Appleby\rquote s }{\insrsid11020451 inaugural}{\insrsid15076854  luncheon on Wedne
sday, having put bunting up in the town the previous evening for this event and the Jubilee and a charter train of 600 people visiting Appleby on May 18}{\super\insrsid15076854 th}{\insrsid15076854 
. The train visit has been helped by EDC to bring visitors to Appleby! At the luncheon both the Majors
 of Appleby and Carlisle made mention of the FMD outbreak, both hoping that visitors will be back to normal this year. Visiting Skipton this week I was pleased to see fields filled with stock, on the surface there doesn\rquote 
t seem to be a shortage of animals. Undecided whether to give evidence at the FMD inquiry when it comes to Appleby next week. I normally keep a low profile at such gatherings!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 16
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Unable to attend the FMD inquiry in Appleby as we had a}{\insrsid11020451 n i}{\insrsid15076854 mportant Rotary Club meeting, seemingly a good at
tendance, The Herald reported some evidence, the local town office painted a bleak picture for Appleby trade, saying that 2 businesses had closed down and 1 more was closing in July, as well as the fact that walkers were not returning beca}{
\insrsid11020451 u}{\insrsid15076854 se some footpaths were still not open \endash  didn\rquote 
t know about this. Our turn-over is considerably up on last year and even the year before, certainly we have had quite a few tourists this last couple of weeks, and the local trade continues well \endash  we musty be doing something c
orrect! This Saturday a charter train from Cleethorpes stopped for two hours in Appleby \endash 
 600 people!! We had a good day, as there were other visitors and locals before and after the train, all very encouraging. The train was helped by EDC with money from 
regeneration I think to pay for a jazz band at the station and classic coaches to bring the people to the town from the station.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 17
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
One of our farmer Rotary Club members gave a slide show and talk on FMD and how it affected his farm. Two other of our
 farmer members decided not to take part as they wished to forget, however, he sensibly went over the slaughter shots very quickly. He said it was a relief when they knew they had got FMD, he found the restocking very emotional, but is now looking forward
 with a positive mood.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Again shop trade is still much improved on last year and the year before. We are now preparing for the horse fair which takes place in about 1\'bd
 weeks time, always an anxious time leading up to it. Have just heard that the other gift shop in the town is not going to open as they don\rquote 
t want the hassle and cost of employing more staff. Not good for the town really. We manage with 3 of us in the shop, but it is well worth while. Depressing start to the week weather wise, hasn\rquote t really stopped raining. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 18
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1546}Preparing{\*\bkmkend _VV1546} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1547}for{\*\bkmkend _VV1547} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1548}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1548} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1549}horse{\*\bkmkend _VV1549} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1550}fair{\*\bkmkend _VV1550} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1551}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1551} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1553M}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1553M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1554}extra{\*\bkmkend _VV1554} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1555}stock{\*\bkmkend _VV1555} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1556}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1556} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1557}rearranging{\*\bkmkend _VV1557} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1558}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1558} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1559}shop{\*\bkmkstart _VV1560M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1559}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1560M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1561}People{\*\bkmkend _VV1561} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1562}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1562} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1572}predicting{\*\bkmkend _VV1572} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1573}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1573} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1574}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1574} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1575}bigger{\*\bkmkend _VV1575} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1576}fare{\*\bkmkend _VV1576} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1577}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1577} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1578}year{\*\bkmkstart _VV1579M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1578},{\*\bkmkend _VV1579M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1580}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1580} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1582}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1582} year\rquote s {\*\bkmkstart _VV1584}cancelled{\*\bkmkend _VV1584} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1585}due{\*\bkmkend _VV1585} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1586}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1586} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1587}F{\*\bkmkend _VV1587}MD. W{\*\bkmkstart _VV1604}e{\*\bkmkend _VV1604} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1605}always{\*\bkmkend _VV1605} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1606}get{\*\bkmkend _VV1606} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1607}
on{\*\bkmkend _VV1607} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1608}edge{\*\bkmkend _VV1608} a {\*\bkmkstart _VV1611}bit{\*\bkmkend _VV1611} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1612}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1612} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1613}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1613} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1614}point
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1615M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1614}!{\*\bkmkend _VV1615M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1616}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1616} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1618M}19{\*\bkmkstart _VV1619M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1618M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1620}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1619M}Start{\*\bkmkend _VV1620} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1621}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1621} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1622}Appleby{\*\bkmkend _VV1622} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1623}Horse{\*\bkmkend _VV1623} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1624}Fair{\*\bkmkstart _VV1625M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1624},{\*\bkmkend _VV1625M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1626}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1626} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1627}much{\*\bkmkend _VV1627} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1628}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1628} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1629}busier{\*\bkmkend _VV1629} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1630}
than{\*\bkmkend _VV1630} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1631}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1631} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1633M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV1633M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1634}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1634} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1637M}2000{\*\bkmkstart _VV1638M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1637M}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1638M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1639}People{\*\bkmkend _VV1639} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1640}say{\*\bkmkend _VV1640} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1641}it's{\*\bkmkend _VV1641} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1642}because{\*\bkmkend _VV1642} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1644}no
{\*\bkmkend _VV1644} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1645}fair{\*\bkmkend _VV1645} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1646}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1646} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1647}year{\*\bkmkend _VV1647} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1648}due{\*\bkmkend _VV1648} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1649}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1649} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1650}FMD{\*\bkmkend _VV1650}.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1653}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1653} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1655M}20{\*\bkmkstart _VV1656M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1655M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1657}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1656M}Exceptionally{\*\bkmkend _VV1657} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1658}busy{\*\bkmkend _VV1658} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1659}time{\*\bkmkend _VV1659} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1660}over{\*\bkmkend _VV1660} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1661}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1661} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1662}horse{\*\bkmkend _VV1662} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1663}fair{\*\bkmkstart _VV1664M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1663},{\*\bkmkend _VV1664M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1665}even{\*\bkmkend _VV1665} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1667}better{\*\bkmkend _VV1667} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1668}than{\*\bkmkend _VV1668} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1669}year{\*\bkmkend _VV1669} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1673M}200{\*\bkmkend _VV1673M}0. {\*\bkmkstart _VV1676}very{\*\bkmkend _VV1676} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1677}wet{\*\bkmkend _VV1677} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1678}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1678} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1679}Lydia{\*\bkmkend _VV1679} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1680}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1680} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1681}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1681} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1682}hail{\*\bkmkend _VV1682} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1683}
which{\*\bkmkend _VV1683} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1684}worked{\*\bkmkend _VV1684} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1685}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1685} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1686}our{\*\bkmkend _VV1686} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1687}favour{\*\bkmkend _VV1687} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1688}as
{\*\bkmkend _VV1688} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1689}people{\*\bkmkend _VV1689} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1690}are{\*\bkmkend _VV1690} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1691}tired{\*\bkmkend _VV1691} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1692}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1692} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1693}walking
{\*\bkmkend _VV1693} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1694}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1694} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1695}ankle-deep{\*\bkmkend _VV1695} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1696}mud{\*\bkmkend _VV1696} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1697}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1697} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1698}then
{\*\bkmkend _VV1698} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1699}come{\*\bkmkend _VV1699} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1700}into{\*\bkmkend _VV1700} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1701}town{\*\bkmkstart _VV1702M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1701}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1702M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1703}Although
{\*\bkmkend _VV1703} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1704}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1704} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1705}were{\*\bkmkend _VV1705} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1706}exhausted{\*\bkmkend _VV1706} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1707}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1707} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1708}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1708} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1709}had{\*\bkmkend _VV1709} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1710}fun{\*\bkmkend _VV1710} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1711}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1711} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1712}many{\*\bkmkend _VV1712} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1713}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1713} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1714}
our{\*\bkmkend _VV1714} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1715}regular{\*\bkmkend _VV1715} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1716}Horse{\*\bkmkend _VV1716} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1717}Fair{\*\bkmkend _VV1717} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1718}visitors{\*\bkmkstart _VV1719M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1718}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1719M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1720}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1720} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1721}had{\*\bkmkend _VV1721} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1722}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1722} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1723}discretion{\*\bkmkend _VV1723} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1724}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1724}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1725}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1725} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1726}local{\*\bkmkend _VV1726} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1727}farmer{\*\bkmkend _VV1727} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1728}hoping{\*\bkmkend _VV1728} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1729}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1729} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1730}get{\*\bkmkend _VV1730} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1731}funding{\*\bkmkend _VV1731} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1732}{\*\bkmkstart _VV1736}for{\*\bkmkend _VV1732} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1733}an{\*\bkmkend _VV1733} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1734}equestrian
{\*\bkmkend _VV1734} centre in{\*\bkmkend _VV1736} a {\*\bkmkstart _VV1739}village{\*\bkmkstart _VV1740M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1739},{\*\bkmkend _VV1740M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1741}also{\*\bkmkend _VV1741} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1742}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1742} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1743}farm{\*\bkmkend _VV1743}er {\*\bkmkstart _VV1745}hoping{\*\bkmkend _VV1745} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1746}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1746} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1747}put{\*\bkmkend _VV1747} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1748}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1748} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1749
}an{\*\bkmkend _VV1749} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1750}all{\*\bkmkend _VV1750} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1751}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV1751} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1752}trotting{\*\bkmkend _VV1752} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1753}track{\*\bkmkend _VV1753} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1754}so
{\*\bkmkend _VV1754} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1755}they{\*\bkmkend _VV1755} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1756}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1756} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1757}bring{\*\bkmkend _VV1757} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1758}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1758} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1759}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1759} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1760}bit{\*\bkmkend _VV1760} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1761}more{\*\bkmkend _VV1761} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1762}trade{\*\bkmkend _VV1762} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1763}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1763} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1764}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1764} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1765}
tow{\*\bkmkend _VV1765}n. {\*\bkmkstart _VV1766}discussion{\*\bkmkend _VV1766} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1767}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1767} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1768}also{\*\bkmkend _VV1768} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1769}going{\*\bkmkend _VV1769} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1770}on
{\*\bkmkend _VV1770} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1771}as{\*\bkmkend _VV1771} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1772}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1772} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1773}whether{\*\bkmkend _VV1773} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1774}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1774} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1775}redundant
{\*\bkmkend _VV1775} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1776}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1776} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1777}Shire{\*\bkmkend _VV1777} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1778}Hall{\*\bkmkend _VV1778} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1779}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1779} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1780}Appleby{\*\bkmkend _VV1780}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1781}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1781} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1782}become{\*\bkmkend _VV1782} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1783}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1783} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1784}Romany{\*\bkmkend _VV1784} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1785}museum{\*\bkmkstart _VV1786M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1785},{\*\bkmkend _VV1786M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1787}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1787} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1788}good{\*\bkmkend _VV1788} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1789}idea{\*\bkmkend _VV1789} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1790}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1790} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1791}it
{\*\bkmkend _VV1791} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1792}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1792} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1793}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1793} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1794}detrimental{\*\bkmkend _VV1794} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1795}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1795} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1796}our
{\*\bkmkend _VV1796} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1797}horse{\*\bkmkend _VV1797} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1798}fair{\*\bkmkend _VV1798} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1799}trade{\*\bkmkstart _VV1800M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1799},{\*\bkmkend _VV1800M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1801}on{\*\bkmkend _VV1801} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1802}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1802} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1803}other{\*\bkmkend _VV1803} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1804}hand{\*\bkmkend _VV1804} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1805}could{\*\bkmkend _VV1805} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1806}bring{\*\bkmkend _VV1806} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1807}extra{\*\bkmkend _VV1807} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1808}people{\*\bkmkend _VV1808} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1809}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1809} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1810}Appleby{\*\bkmkend _VV1810} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1811}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1811} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1812}we{\*\bkmkend _VV1812}\rquote d {\*\bkmkstart _VV1813}benefit{\*\bkmkend _VV1813}.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1814}Weak{\*\bkmkend _VV1814} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1817M}21{\*\bkmkstart _VV1818M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1817M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1819}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1818M}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1819} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1820}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1820} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1821}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1821} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1822}last{\*\bkmkend _VV1822} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1823}bought{\*\bkmkend _VV1823} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1824}a
{\*\bkmkend _VV1824} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1825}copy{\*\bkmkend _VV1825} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1826}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1826} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1827}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1827} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1828}heart{\*\bkmkend _VV1828} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1829}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1829} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1830}soul{\*\bkmkstart _VV1831M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1830},{\*\bkmkend _VV1831M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1832}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1832} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1833}have{\*\bkmkend _VV1833} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1834}dipped{\*\bkmkend _VV1834} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1835}
into{\*\bkmkend _VV1835} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1836}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1836} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1837}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1837} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1838}I'm{\*\bkmkend _VV1838} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1839}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1839} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1840}sure{\*\bkmkend _VV1840} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1841}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1841} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1842}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1842} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1843}really{\*\bkmkend _VV1843} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1844}want{\*\bkmkend _VV1844} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1845}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1845} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1846}
read{\*\bkmkend _VV1846} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1847}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV1848M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1847}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1848M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1849}Even{\*\bkmkend _VV1849} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1850}at{\*\bkmkend _VV1850} a year {\*\bkmkstart _VV1854}on
{\*\bkmkend _VV1854} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1855}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1855} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1856}find{\*\bkmkend _VV1856} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1857}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1857} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1858}quite{\*\bkmkend _VV1858} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1859}upsetting{\*\bkmkend _VV1859
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1860}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1860} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1861}see{\*\bkmkend _VV1861} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1862}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1862} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1863}print{\*\bkmkend _VV1863} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1864}what{\*\bkmkend _VV1864} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1865}
people{\*\bkmkend _VV1865} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1866}went{\*\bkmkend _VV1866} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1867}through{\*\bkmkstart _VV1868M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1867},{\*\bkmkend _VV1868M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1869}perhaps{\*\bkmkend _VV1869} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1870}I
{\*\bkmkend _VV1870} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1871}should{\*\bkmkend _VV1871} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1872}keep{\*\bkmkend _VV1872} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1873}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1873} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1874}for{\*\bkmkend _VV1874} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1876M}five{\*\bkmkend _VV1876M
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1877}years{\*\bkmkend _VV1877} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1878}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1878} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1879}then{\*\bkmkend _VV1879} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1880}read{\*\bkmkend _VV1880} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1881}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV1882M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1881}?{\*\bkmkstart _VV1883M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1882M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkend _VV1883M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1884}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1884} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1887M}22{\*\bkmkstart _VV1888M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1887M}\line {\*\bkmkstart _VV1889}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1888M}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1889} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1890}scare{\*\bkmkend _VV1890} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1891}this{\*\bkmkend _VV1891} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1892}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV1893M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1892},{\*\bkmkend _VV1893M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1894}
or{\*\bkmkend _VV1894} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1895}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1895} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1896}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1896} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1897}last{\*\bkmkstart _VV1898M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1897},{\*\bkmkend _VV1898M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1899}that{\*\bkmkend _VV1899} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1900}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1900} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1901}peak{\*\bkmkend _VV1901} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1902}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1902} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1903}North{\*\bkmkend _VV1903} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1904}Yorkshire{\*\bkmkend _VV1904} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1905}was{\*\bkmkend _VV1905} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1906}suspect{\*\bkmkend _VV1906} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1907}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1907} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1908}FMD{\*\bkmkstart _VV1909M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1908}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1909M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1910}
Thankfully{\*\bkmkend _VV1910} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1911}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1911} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1912}wasn't{\*\bkmkstart _VV1913M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1912},{\*\bkmkend _VV1913M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1914}but{\*\bkmkend _VV1914} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1915}this
{\*\bkmkend _VV1915} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1916}sent{\*\bkmkend _VV1916} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1917}shockwaves{\*\bkmkend _VV1917} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1918}through{\*\bkmkend _VV1918} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1919}me{\*\bkmkstart _VV1920M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1919}.
{\*\bkmkend _VV1920M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1921}The{\*\bkmkend _VV1921} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1922}thought{\*\bkmkend _VV1922} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1923}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1923} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1924}it{\*\bkmkend _VV1924} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1925}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1925} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1926}what{\*\bkmkend _VV1926} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1927}action{\*\bkmkend _VV1927} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1928}would{\*\bkmkend _VV1928} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1929}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1929} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1930}take{\*\bkmkend _VV1930}n, 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1932}what{\*\bkmkend _VV1932} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1933}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1933} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1934}country{\*\bkmkend _VV1934} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1935}be{\*\bkmkend _VV1935} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1936}shut{\*\bkmkend _VV1936} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1937}down{\*\bkmkend _VV1937} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1938}again{\*\bkmkstart _VV1940M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1938}?{\*\bkmkend _VV1940M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1941}I{\*\bkmkend _VV1941} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1942}wonder{\*\bkmkend _VV1942} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1943}
if{\*\bkmkend _VV1943} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1944}there{\*\bkmkend _VV1944} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1945}is{\*\bkmkend _VV1945} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1946}now{\*\bkmkend _VV1946} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1947}a{\*\bkmkend _VV1947} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1948}strategic
{\*\bkmkend _VV1948} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1949}plan{\*\bkmkend _VV1949} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1950}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1950} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1951}place{\*\bkmkend _VV1951} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1952}to{\*\bkmkend _VV1952} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1953}deal{\*\bkmkend _VV1953} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1954}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1954} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1955}FMD{\*\bkmkstart _VV1956M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1955},{\*\bkmkend _VV1956M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1957}and{\*\bkmkend _VV1957} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1958}what{\*\bkmkend _VV1958} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1959}it
{\*\bkmkend _VV1959} is{\*\bkmkstart _VV1961M}?{\*\bkmkend _VV1961M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1962}Have{\*\bkmkend _VV1962} caught {\*\bkmkstart _VV1965M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV1965M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1966}or{\*\bkmkend _VV1966} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1968M}two
{\*\bkmkend _VV1968M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1969}part{\*\bkmkend _VV1969}s {\*\bkmkstart _VV1970}of{\*\bkmkend _VV1970} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1971}the{\*\bkmkend _VV1971} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1972}inquiry}{\cs20\super\insrsid11020451 {\*\bkmkstart _VV1973M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV1972}\chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\super\insrsid399300 \chftn }{\insrsid399300 
 Cumbria Foot and Mouth disease Inquiry}}}{\insrsid15076854 ,{\*\bkmkend _VV1973M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1974}Brigadier{\*\bkmkend _VV1974} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1975}Birtwistle{\*\bkmkend _VV1975} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1976}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1976} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1977
}pulling{\*\bkmkend _VV1977} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1978}any{\*\bkmkend _VV1978} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1979}punches{\*\bkmkend _VV1979} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1980}still{\*\bkmkstart _VV1981M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1980}.{\*\bkmkend _VV1981M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1982}Fairly
{\*\bkmkend _VV1982} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1983}busy{\*\bkmkend _VV1983} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1984}in{\*\bkmkend _VV1984} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1985}shop{\*\bkmkstart _VV1986M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1985},{\*\bkmkend _VV1986M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1987}still{\*\bkmkend _VV1987} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1988}going{\*\bkmkend _VV1988} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1989}well{\*\bkmkstart _VV1990M}{\*\bkmkend _VV1989},{\*\bkmkend _VV1990M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1991}not{\*\bkmkend _VV1991} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1992}besieged{\*\bkmkend _VV1992} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV1993}with{\*\bkmkend _VV1993} {\*\bkmkstart _VV1994}visitors{\*\bkmkend _VV1994} though{\*\bkmkstart _VV1997M}!{\*\bkmkend _VV1997M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV1998}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV1998} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2001M}23{\*\bkmkstart _VV2002M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2001M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2003}{\*\bkmkend _VV2002M}The{\*\bkmkend _VV2003} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2004}Wet{\*\bkmkend _VV2004} weather {\*\bkmkstart _VV2006}there
{\*\bkmkend _VV2006} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2007}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2007} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2008}even{\*\bkmkend _VV2008} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2009}getting{\*\bkmkend _VV2009} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2010}me{\*\bkmkend _VV2010} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2011}down{\*\bkmkend _VV2011} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2012}now{\*\bkmkstart _VV2013M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2012}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2013M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2014}S{\*\bkmkend _VV2014}ummer {\*\bkmkstart _VV2016}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2016} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2017}slipping{\*\bkmkend _VV2017} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2018}by{\*\bkmkend _VV2018} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2019}without{\*\bkmkend _VV2019} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2020}any{\*\bkmkend _VV2020} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2021}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2021} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2022}warm{\*\bkmkend _VV2022} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2023}
weather{\*\bkmkstart _VV2024M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2023}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2024M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2025}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2025} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2026}had{\*\bkmkend _VV2026} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2027}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2027} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2028}summer{\*\bkmkend _VV2028
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2029}evening{\*\bkmkend _VV2029} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2030}rotary{\*\bkmkend _VV2030} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2031}ball{\*\bkmkend _VV2031} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2032}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2032} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2033}Saturday{\*\bkmkend _VV2033} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2034}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2034} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2035}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2035} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2036}marquee{\*\bkmkstart _VV2037M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2036},{\*\bkmkend _VV2037M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2038}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2038} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2039}
good{\*\bkmkend _VV2039} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2040}evening{\*\bkmkend _VV2040} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2041}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2041} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2042}cold{\*\bkmkstart _VV2043M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2042}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2043M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2044}This
{\*\bkmkend _VV2044} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2045}was{\*\bkmkend _VV2045} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2046}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2046} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2047}held{\*\bkmkend _VV2047} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2048}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2048} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2049}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2049} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2050}because{\*\bkmkend _VV2050} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2051}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2051} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2052}F{\*\bkmkend _VV2052}MD{\*\bkmkstart _VV2055M}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2055M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2056}Quite{\*\bkmkend _VV2056} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2057
}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2057} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2058}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2058} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2059}more{\*\bkmkend _VV2059} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2060}tourists{\*\bkmkend _VV2060} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2061}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2061} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2062}week
{\*\bkmkend _VV2062} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2063}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2063} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2064}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2064} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2065}reason{\*\bkmkend _VV2065}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2066}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2066} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2067}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2067} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2068}sponsored{\*\bkmkend _VV2068} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2069}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2069} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2070}horse{\*\bkmkend _VV2070} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2071}class{\*\bkmkend _VV2071} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2072}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2072} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2073}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2073} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2074}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2074} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2075}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2075} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2076}Appleby{\*\bkmkend _VV2076} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2077}show{\*\bkmkend _VV2077} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2078}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2078} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2079}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2079} there are no sheep {\*\bkmkstart _VV2082}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2082} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2083}cattle{\*\bkmkend _VV2083} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2084}classes{\*\bkmkstart _VV2085M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2084}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2085M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2086}Preparing{\*\bkmkend _VV2086} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2087}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2087} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2088}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2088} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2089}rotary{\*\bkmkend _VV2089} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2109}fun{\*\bkmkend _VV2109} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2110}run{\*\bkmkend _VV2110} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2111}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2111} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2112}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2112} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2113}held{\*\bkmkend _VV2113} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2114}on
{\*\bkmkend _VV2114} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2115}Sunday{\*\bkmkstart _VV2116M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2115}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2116M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2117}A{\*\bkmkend _VV2117} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2118}friend{\*\bkmkend _VV2118} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2119}who{\*\bkmkend _VV2119} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2120}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2120} a {\*\bkmkstart _VV2122}B&B{\*\bkmkend _VV2122} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2123}guest{\*\bkmkstart _VV2124}{\*\bkmkend _VV2123}house{\*\bkmkstart _VV2125M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2124},{\*\bkmkend _VV2125M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2127
}suffering{\*\bkmkend _VV2127} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2128}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2128} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2131}depression{\*\bkmkend _VV2131} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2132}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2132} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2133}panic{\*\bkmkend _VV2133} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2134}attacks
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2135M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2134},{\*\bkmkend _VV2135M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2136}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2136} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2137}sure{\*\bkmkend _VV2137} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2138}if{\*\bkmkend _VV2138} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2139}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2139} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2140}can{\*\bkmkend _VV2140} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2141}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2141} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2142}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2142} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2143}result{\*\bkmkend _VV2143} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2144}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2144} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2145}a
{\*\bkmkend _VV2145} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2146}difficult{\*\bkmkend _VV2146} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2147}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2147} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2148}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2148} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2149}him{\*\bkmkend _VV2149} due to {\*\bkmkstart _VV2151}FMD
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2152M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2151}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2152M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2153}Looking{\*\bkmkend _VV2153} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2154}back{\*\bkmkend _VV2154} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2155}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2155} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2156}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2156} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2157}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2157} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2158}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2158} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2159}d{\*\bkmkend _VV2159}iaries {\*\bkmkstart _VV2160}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2160} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2161}just{\*\bkmkend _VV2161} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2162
}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV2162} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2163}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2163} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2164}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2164} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2165}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2165} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2166}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2166} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2167}used
{\*\bkmkend _VV2167} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2170}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2170} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2172M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV2172M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2173}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2173} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2175M}two{\*\bkmkend _VV2175M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2176}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2176} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2177}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2177} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2178}sparse{\*\bkmkstart _VV2179M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2178}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2179M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 24
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2185}Busy{\*\bkmkend _VV2185} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2186}day{\*\bkmkend _VV2186} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2187}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2187} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2188}shop{\*\bkmkend _VV2188} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2189}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2189} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2190}Saturday{\*\bkmkend _VV2190} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2191}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2191} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2192}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2192} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2193}carnival{\*\bkmkstart _VV2194M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2193},{\*\bkmkend _VV2194M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2195}turnover{\*\bkmkend _VV2195} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2196}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2196} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2197}holding{\*\bkmkend _VV2197} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2198}up{\*\bkmkend _VV2198} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2199}well{\*\bkmkend _VV2199} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2200}to{\*\bkmkstart _VV2201M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2200}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2201M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2202}Very{\*\bkmkend _VV2202} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2215}good
{\*\bkmkend _VV2215} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2216}turnout{\*\bkmkend _VV2216} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2217}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2217} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2218}both{\*\bkmkend _VV2218} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2219}participants{\*\bkmkend _VV2219} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2220}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV2220} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2221}watchers{\*\bkmkend _VV2221} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2222}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2222} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2223}Carnival{\*\bkmkstart _VV2224M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2223}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2224M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2225}Feeling
{\*\bkmkend _VV2225} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2226}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2226} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2227}trifle{\*\bkmkend _VV2227} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2228}fed{\*\bkmkend _VV2228} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2229}up{\*\bkmkend _VV2229} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2230}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2230} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2231}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV2232M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2231},{\*\bkmkend _VV2232M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2233}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2233} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2234}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2234} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2235}younger{\*\bkmkend _VV2235} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2236}
brother{\*\bkmkend _VV2236} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2237}who{\*\bkmkend _VV2237} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2238}lives{\*\bkmkend _VV2238} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2239}alone{\*\bkmkend _VV2239} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2240}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2240} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2241}Essex
{\*\bkmkend _VV2241} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2242}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2242} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2243}suffers{\*\bkmkend _VV2243} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2244}from{\*\bkmkend _VV2244} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2245}anxiety{\*\bkmkend _VV2245} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2246}and
{\*\bkmkend _VV2246} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2247}depression{\*\bkmkend _VV2247} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2248M}({\*\bkmkstart _VV2250}{\*\bkmkend _VV2248M}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2250} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2251}done{\*\bkmkend _VV2251} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2252}for
{\*\bkmkend _VV2252} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2253}over{\*\bkmkend _VV2253} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2256M}25{\*\bkmkend _VV2256M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2257}years{\*\bkmkstart _VV2258M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2257}){\*\bkmkend _VV2258M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2259}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV2259}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2260}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2260} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2261}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2261} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2262}going{\*\bkmkend _VV2262} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2263}through{\*\bkmkend _VV2263} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2264}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2264} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2265}
bad{\*\bkmkend _VV2265} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2266}patch{\*\bkmkstart _VV2267M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2266},{\*\bkmkend _VV2267M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2268}daily{\*\bkmkend _VV2268} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2269}telephone{\*\bkmkend _VV2269} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2270}calls
{\*\bkmkend _VV2270} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2271}going{\*\bkmkend _VV2271} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2272}over{\*\bkmkend _VV2272} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2273}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2273} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2274}same{\*\bkmkend _VV2274} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2275}ground
{\*\bkmkend _VV2275} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2276}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2276} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2277}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2277} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2278}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2278} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2279}done{\*\bkmkend _VV2279} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2280}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2280} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2281}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2281} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2282}these{\*\bkmkend _VV2282} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2283}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2283} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2284}get{\*\bkmkend _VV2284} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2285}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2285} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2286}
bit{\*\bkmkend _VV2286} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2287}wearing{\*\bkmkend _VV2287} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2289}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2289} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2290}tend{\*\bkmkend _VV2290} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2291}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2291} pull {\*\bkmkstart _VV2293}oneself
{\*\bkmkend _VV2293} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2294}down{\*\bkmkend _VV2294} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2295}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2295} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2298}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2298} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2299}help{\*\bkmkend _VV2299} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2300}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2300} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2301}advice{\*\bkmkend _VV2301} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2302}over{\*\bkmkend _VV2302} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2303}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2303} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2304}these{\*\bkmkend _VV2304} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2305}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2305} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2306}does{\*\bkmkend _VV2306} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2307}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2307} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2308}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2308} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2309}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2309} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2310}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2310} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2311}
done{\*\bkmkend _VV2311} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2312}any{\*\bkmkend _VV2312} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2313}good{\*\bkmkstart _VV2314M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2313}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2314M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2315}Still{\*\bkmkend _VV2315} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2316}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2316}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2317}did{\*\bkmkend _VV2317} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2318}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2318} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2319}about{\*\bkmkend _VV2319} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2321M}three{\*\bkmkend _VV2321M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2322}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2322} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2323}up{\*\bkmkend _VV2323} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2324}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2324} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2325}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2325} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2326}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2326} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2327}ago{\*\bkmkend _VV2327} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2328}of
{\*\bkmkend _VV2328} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2329}reasonable{\*\bkmkend _VV2329} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2330}health{\*\bkmkstart _VV2331M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2330}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2331M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2332}My{\*\bkmkend _VV2332} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2333}own
{\*\bkmkend _VV2333} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2334}coping{\*\bkmkend _VV2334} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2335}mechanism{\*\bkmkend _VV2335} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2336}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2336} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2337}dealing{\*\bkmkend _VV2337} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2338}with
{\*\bkmkend _VV2338} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2339}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2339} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2340}distressed{\*\bkmkend _VV2340} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2341}brother{\*\bkmkend _VV2341} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2342}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2342} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2343}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV2343} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2344}other{\*\bkmkend _VV2344} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2345}end{\*\bkmkend _VV2345} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2346}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2346} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2347}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2347} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2348}phone{\*\bkmkend _VV2348} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2349}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2349} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2350}easier{\*\bkmkend _VV2350} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2351}said{\*\bkmkend _VV2351} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2352}than{\*\bkmkend _VV2352} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2353}done{\*\bkmkstart _VV2354M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2353}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2354M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid399300 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2355}\page }{\insrsid15076854 Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2355} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2358M}25{\*\bkmkstart _VV2359M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2358M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2360}{\*\bkmkend _VV2359M}A{\*\bkmkend _VV2360} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2361}useful{\*\bkmkend _VV2361} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2362}trade
{\*\bkmkend _VV2362} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2363}fair{\*\bkmkend _VV2363} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2364}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2364} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2365}Harrogate{\*\bkmkend _VV2365} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2366}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2366} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2367}Sunday
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2368M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2367},{\*\bkmkend _VV2368M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2369}good{\*\bkmkend _VV2369} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2370}sunny{\*\bkmkend _VV2370} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2371}weather{\*\bkmkend _VV2371} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2372}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2372}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2373}well{\*\bkmkend _VV2373} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2375M}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2375M} beautiful {\*\bkmkstart _VV2377}gardens{\*\bkmkend _VV2377} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2378}around{\*\bkmkend _VV2378} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2379}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2379} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2380}town{\*\bkmkstart _VV2381M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2380}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2381M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2382}Our{\*\bkmkend _VV2382} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2385M}35th{\*\bkmkend _VV2385M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2386}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV2386} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2387}anniversary{\*\bkmkend _VV2387} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2388}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2388} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2389}week{\*\bkmkstart _VV2390M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2389}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2390M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2391}Quite{\*\bkmkend _VV2391} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2392}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2392} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2393}busy{\*\bkmkend _VV2393} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2394}week{\*\bkmkend _VV2394} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2395}socially{\*\bkmkend _VV2395} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2396}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2396} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2398}rotary{\*\bkmkend _VV2398} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2399}events{\*\bkmkend _VV2399} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2400}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2400} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2401}hopefully{\*\bkmkend _VV2401} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2402}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2402} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2403}down{\*\bkmkend _VV2403} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2404}state{\*\bkmkend _VV2404} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2405}brought{\*\bkmkend _VV2405} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2406}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2406} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2407}by{\*\bkmkend _VV2407} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2408}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2408} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2409}brother's{\*\bkmkend _VV2409} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2410}w{\*\bkmkend _VV2410}oes {\*\bkmkstart _VV2412}might{\*\bkmkend _VV2412} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2413}lift{\*\bkmkstart _VV2414M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2413}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2414M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2415}Managed{\*\bkmkend _VV2415} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2416}pub{\*\bkmkend _VV2416} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2417}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2417} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2418}brother's{\*\bkmkend _VV2418} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2419}difficulties{\*\bkmkend _VV2419} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2420}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2420} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2421}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2421} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2422}background{\*\bkmkend _VV2422} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2423}again{\*\bkmkstart _VV2424M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2423},{\*\bkmkend _VV2424M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2425}only{\*\bkmkend _VV2425} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2426}way{\*\bkmkend _VV2426} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2427}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2427} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2428}survive{\*\bkmkend _VV2428} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2429}
and{\*\bkmkend _VV2429} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2430}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2430} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2431}get{\*\bkmkend _VV2431} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2432}depressed{\*\bkmkend _VV2432} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2433}myself{\*\bkmkstart _VV2434M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2433}!
{\*\bkmkend _VV2434M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2435}Over{\*\bkmkend _VV2435} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2436}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2436} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2437}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2437} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2438}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2438} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2439}feel{\*\bkmkend _VV2439} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2440}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2440} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2441}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2441} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2442}more{\*\bkmkend _VV2442} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2443}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2443} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2444}less{\*\bkmkend _VV2444} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2445}
done{\*\bkmkend _VV2445} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2446}all{\*\bkmkend _VV2446} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2447}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2447} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2448}can{\*\bkmkend _VV2448} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2449}do{\*\bkmkend _VV2449} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2450}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2450} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2451}help{\*\bkmkend _VV2451} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2452}him{\*\bkmkend _VV2452} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2453}within{\*\bkmkend _VV2453} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2454}reason{\*\bkmkstart _VV2455M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2454}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2455M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 26
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2456}It{\*\bkmkend _VV2456} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2457}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2457} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2458}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2458} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2459
}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2459} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2460}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2460} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2461}green{\*\bkmkend _VV2461} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2462}FHM{\*\bkmkend _VV2462} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2463}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2463} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2464}Appleby
{\*\bkmkend _VV2464} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2465}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2465} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2466}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2466} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2467}local{\*\bkmkend _VV2467} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2468}paper{\*\bkmkend _VV2468} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2469}which{\*\bkmkend _VV2469}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2470}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2470} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2471}included{\*\bkmkend _VV2471} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2472}an{\*\bkmkend _VV2472} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2473}article{\*\bkmkend _VV2473} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2474}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2474} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2475}our{\*\bkmkend _VV2475} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2476}business{\*\bkmkstart _VV2477M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2476},{\*\bkmkend _VV2477M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2478}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2478} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2479}complimentary{\*\bkmkend _VV2479} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2480}saying{\*\bkmkend _VV2480} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2481}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2481} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2482}are{\*\bkmkend _VV2482} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2483}an{\*\bkmkend _VV2483} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2484}asset{\*\bkmkend _VV2484} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2485}
to{\*\bkmkend _VV2485} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2486}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2486} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2487}town{\*\bkmkstart _VV2488M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2487}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2488M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2489}Good{\*\bkmkend _VV2489} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2490}morale{\*\bkmkend _VV2490
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2491}booster{\*\bkmkstart _VV2492M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2491}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2492M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2493}Many{\*\bkmkend _VV2493} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2494}customers{\*\bkmkend _VV2494} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2495}commented{\*\bkmkend _VV2495} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2496}on{\*\bkmkend _VV2496} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2497}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2497} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2498}article{\*\bkmkend _VV2498} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2499}say{\*\bkmkend _VV2499}ing {\*\bkmkstart _VV2500}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2500} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2501}deserve{\*\bkmkend _VV2501} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2502}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV2503M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2502}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2503M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2504}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2504} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2505}had{\*\bkmkend _VV2505} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2506}
Sunday{\*\bkmkend _VV2506} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2507}off{\*\bkmkend _VV2507} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2508}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2508} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2509}went{\*\bkmkend _VV2509} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2510}round{\*\bkmkend _VV2510} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2511}open
{\*\bkmkend _VV2511} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2512}gardens{\*\bkmkend _VV2512} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2513}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2513} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2514}Ravensdale{\*\bkmkend _VV2514} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2518}most{\*\bkmkend _VV2518} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2519}enjoyable
{\*\bkmkend _VV2519}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2520}called{\*\bkmkend _VV2520} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2521}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2521} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2522}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2522} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2523}Hartley{\*\bkmkend _VV2523} Pine and {\*\bkmkstart _VV2526}had
{\*\bkmkend _VV2526} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2527}lunch{\*\bkmkend _VV2527} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2528}outside{\*\bkmkend _VV2528}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2529}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2529} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2530}wonder{\*\bkmkend _VV2530} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2531}whether
{\*\bkmkend _VV2531} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2532}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2532} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2533}get{\*\bkmkend _VV2533} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2534}much{\*\bkmkend _VV2534} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2535}custom{\*\bkmkend _VV2535} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2536}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2536} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2537}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2537} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2538}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2538} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2539}rather{\*\bkmkend _VV2539} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2540}out{\*\bkmkend _VV2540} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2541}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2541} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2542}the
{\*\bkmkend _VV2542} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2543}way{\*\bkmkstart _VV2544M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2543},{\*\bkmkend _VV2544M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2545}however{\*\bkmkstart _VV2546M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2545},{\*\bkmkend _VV2546M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2547}some{\*\bkmkend _VV2547} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2548}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2548} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2549}nice{\*\bkmkend _VV2549} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2550}items{\*\bkmkend _VV2550} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2551}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2551} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2552}sale{\*\bkmkend _VV2552}.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par {\*\bkmkstart _VV2561}Week{\*\bkmkend _VV2561} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2564M}27{\*\bkmkstart _VV2565M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2564M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2566}{\*\bkmkend _VV2565M}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2566} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2567}bought{\*\bkmkend _VV2567} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2568}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2568
} F{\*\bkmkstart _VV2569}armers{\*\bkmkend _VV2569} W{\*\bkmkstart _VV2570}eekly{\*\bkmkend _VV2570} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2571}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2571} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2572}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2572} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2574M}first{\*\bkmkend _VV2574M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2575}time{\*\bkmkend _VV2575} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2576}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2576} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2577}ages{\*\bkmkend _VV2577} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2578}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2578} r{\*\bkmkstart _VV2579}e{\*\bkmkend _VV2579}ad {\*\bkmkstart _VV2580}
FMD{\*\bkmkend _VV2580} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2581}reports{\*\bkmkstart _VV2582M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2581}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2582M} The Anderson {\*\bkmkstart _VV2584}report{\*\bkmkend _VV2584} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2585}doesn't{\*\bkmkend _VV2585} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2586}
tell{\*\bkmkend _VV2586} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2587}us{\*\bkmkend _VV2587} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2588}anything{\*\bkmkend _VV2588} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2589}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2589} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2590}didn't{\*\bkmkend _VV2590} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2591}know
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2592M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2591},{\*\bkmkend _VV2592M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2593}however{\*\bkmkend _VV2593} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2594}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2594} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2595}Telegraph{\*\bkmkend _VV2595} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2596}had
{\*\bkmkend _VV2596} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2597}an{\*\bkmkend _VV2597} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2598}interesting{\*\bkmkend _VV2598} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2599}article{\*\bkmkend _VV2599} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2600}saying{\*\bkmkend _VV2600} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2601}that
{\*\bkmkend _VV2601} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2602}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2602} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2603}mechanism{\*\bkmkend _VV2603} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2604}was{\*\bkmkend _VV2604} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2605}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2605} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2606}place
{\*\bkmkend _VV2606} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2607}t{\*\bkmkend _VV2607}o {\*\bkmkstart _VV2608}use{\*\bkmkend _VV2608} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2609}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2609} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2610}vaccination{\*\bkmkend _VV2610} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2611}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2611
} the E.U {\*\bkmkstart _VV2614}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2614} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2615}ou{\*\bkmkend _VV2615}r {\*\bkmkstart _VV2616}government{\*\bkmkend _VV2616} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2617}saw{\*\bkmkend _VV2617} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2618}fit{\*\bkmkend _VV2618} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2619}not{\*\bkmkend _VV2619} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2620}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2620} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2621}use{\*\bkmkend _VV2621} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2622}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV2623M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2622},{\*\bkmkend _VV2623M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2624}I
{\*\bkmkend _VV2624} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2625}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2625} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2626}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2626} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2627}recall{\*\bkmkend _VV2627} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2628}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2628} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2629}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2629} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2630}NFU{\*\bkmkend _VV2630} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2631}were{\*\bkmkend _VV2631} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2632}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2632} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2633}vociferous{\*\bkmkend _VV2633} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2634}against{\*\bkmkend _VV2634} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2635}its{\*\bkmkend _VV2635} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2636}use{\*\bkmkend _VV2636}, no mention {\*\bkmkstart _VV2637}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2637} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2638}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2638} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2639}art{\*\bkmkend _VV2639}icle 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2641}about{\*\bkmkend _VV2641} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2642}them{\*\bkmkstart _VV2643M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2642}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2643M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2645M}One{\*\bkmkend _VV2645M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2646}can{\*\bkmkend _VV2646} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2647
}only{\*\bkmkend _VV2647} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2648}hope{\*\bkmkend _VV2648} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2649}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2649} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2650}lessons{\*\bkmkend _VV2650} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2651}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2651} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2652}be
{\*\bkmkend _VV2652} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2653}learnt{\*\bkmkend _VV2653} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2654}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2654} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2655}plans{\*\bkmkend _VV2655} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2656}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2656} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2657}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2657}
 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2658}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2658} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2659}place{\*\bkmkstart _VV2660M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2659}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2660M} Of}{\insrsid6165964 f}{\insrsid15076854  to Essex {\*\bkmkstart _VV2663}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2663} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2664}week{\*\bkmkend _VV2664}end {\*\bkmkstart _VV2678}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2678} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2666}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2666} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2667}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2667} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2668}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV2668} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2669}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2669} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2670}friends{\*\bkmkend _VV2670}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2671}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2671} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2672}will{\*\bkmkend _VV2672} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2673}meet{\*\bkmkend _VV2673} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2674
}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2674} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2675}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2675} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2676}brother{\*\bkmkstart _VV2677M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2676}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2677M}
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 28
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 {\*\bkmkstart _VV2679}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2679} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2680}attended{\*\bkmkend _VV2680
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2681}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2681} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2682}wedding{\*\bkmkend _VV2682} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2683}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2683} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2684}Essex{\*\bkmkstart _VV2685M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2684},{\*\bkmkend _VV2685M} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2686}most{\*\bkmkend _VV2686} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2687}enjoyable{\*\bkmkend _VV2687} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2688}meeting{\*\bkmkend _VV2688} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2689}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2689} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2690}old{\*\bkmkend _VV2690} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2691}friends{\*\bkmkend _VV2691} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2692}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2692} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2693}seeing{\*\bkmkend _VV2693} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2694}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2694} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2695}happy{\*\bkmkend _VV2695} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2696}couple{\*\bkmkstart _VV2697M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2696}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2697M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2698}We{\*\bkmkend _VV2698} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2699}called{\*\bkmkend _VV2699} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2700}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2700} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2701}
on{\*\bkmkend _VV2701} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2702}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2702} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2703}ex-boss{\*\bkmkend _VV2703}\rquote s {\*\bkmkstart _VV2704}wife{\*\bkmkend _VV2704} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2705}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2705} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2706}coffee
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2707M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2706},{\*\bkmkend _VV2707M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2708}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2708} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2709}died{\*\bkmkend _VV2709} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2710}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2710} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2711}few{\*\bkmkend _VV2711} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2712}months{\*\bkmkend _VV2712} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2713}ago{\*\bkmkstart _VV2714M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2713},{\*\bkmkend _VV2714M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2715}she{\*\bkmkend _VV2715} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2716}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV2716} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2717
}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2717} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2718}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2718} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2719}coping{\*\bkmkend _VV2719} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2720}well{\*\bkmkend _VV2720} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2721}but{\*\bkmkend _VV2721} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2722}related
{\*\bkmkend _VV2722} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2723}bad{\*\bkmkend _VV2723} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2724}news{\*\bkmkend _VV2724} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2725}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2725} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2727M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV2727M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2728}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2728} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2729}farm{\*\bkmkend _VV2729} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2730}workers{\*\bkmkend _VV2730} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2731}who{\*\bkmkend _VV2731} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2732}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2732} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2733}been{\*\bkmkend _VV2733} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2734}there{\*\bkmkend _VV2734} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2735}many{\*\bkmkend _VV2735} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2736}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2736} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2737}including{\*\bkmkend _VV2737} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2738}my{\*\bkmkend _VV2738} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2739}time{\*\bkmkend _VV2739} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2740}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2740} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2741}manager{\*\bkmkend _VV2741} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2742}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2742} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2743}farmer{\*\bkmkend _VV2743}, he 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2745}has{\*\bkmkend _VV2745} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2746}got{\*\bkmkend _VV2746} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2747}inoperable{\*\bkmkend _VV2747} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2748}cancer{\*\bkmkend _VV2748}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2749}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2749} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2750}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2750} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2751}only{\*\bkmkend _VV2751} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2753M}5{\*\bkmkend _VV2753M}8. Arable {\*\bkmkstart _VV2756}farming{\*\bkmkend _VV2756} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2757}also{\*\bkmkend _VV2757} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2758}seems{\*\bkmkend _VV2758} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2759}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2759} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2760}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2760} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2761}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2761} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2762}turmoil{\*\bkmkend _VV2762} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2763}
with{\*\bkmkend _VV2763} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2764}low{\*\bkmkend _VV2764} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2765}prices{\*\bkmkend _VV2765} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2766}although{\*\bkmkend _VV2766} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2767}they{\*\bkmkend _VV2767} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2768}still
{\*\bkmkend _VV2768} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2769}seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2769} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2770}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2770} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2771}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2771} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2772}buying{\*\bkmkend _VV2772} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2773}land{\*\bkmkend _VV2773} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2774}if{\*\bkmkend _VV2774} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2775}any{\*\bkmkend _VV2775} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2776}comes{\*\bkmkend _VV2776} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2777}up{\*\bkmkstart _VV2778M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2777}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2778M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2779}I'm
{\*\bkmkend _VV2779} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2780}relieved{\*\bkmkend _VV2780} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2781}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2781} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2782}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2782} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2783}left{\*\bkmkend _VV2783} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2784}fa{\*\bkmkend _VV2784}
rming {\*\bkmkstart _VV2786M}50{\*\bkmkend _VV2786M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2787}years{\*\bkmkend _VV2787} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2788}ago{\*\bkmkend _VV2788} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2789}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2789} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2790}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2790} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2791}would{\*\bkmkend _VV2791} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2792}find{\*\bkmkend _VV2792} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2793}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2793} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2794}very{\*\bkmkend _VV2794} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2795}difficult{\*\bkmkend _VV2795} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2796}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2796} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2797}cope{\*\bkmkend _VV2797} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2798}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2798} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2799}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2799} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2800}new{\*\bkmkend _VV2800} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2801}
situation{\*\bkmkstart _VV2802M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2801},{\*\bkmkend _VV2802M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2803}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2803} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2804}suppose{\*\bkmkend _VV2804} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2805}this{\*\bkmkend _VV2805} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2806}was
{\*\bkmkend _VV2806} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2808M}one{\*\bkmkend _VV2808M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2809}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2809} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2810}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2810} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2811}reasons{\*\bkmkend _VV2811} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2812}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2812} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2813}decided{\*\bkmkend _VV2813} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2814}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2814} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2815}leave{\*\bkmkend _VV2815} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2816}as{\*\bkmkend _VV2816} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2817}we{\*\bkmkend _VV2817} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2818}
were{\*\bkmkend _VV2818} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2819}looking{\*\bkmkend _VV2819} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2820}for{\*\bkmkend _VV2820} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2821}another{\*\bkmkend _VV2821} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2822}challenge{\*\bkmkend _VV2822} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2823}in
{\*\bkmkend _VV2823} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2824}life{\*\bkmkstart _VV2825M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2824}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2825M} We {\*\bkmkstart _VV2828}really{\*\bkmkend _VV2828} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2829}have{\*\bkmkend _VV2829} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2830}been
{\*\bkmkend _VV2830} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2831}so{\*\bkmkend _VV2831} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2832}fortunate{\*\bkmkend _VV2832} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2833}with{\*\bkmkend _VV2833} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2834}our{\*\bkmkend _VV2834} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2835}shop
{\*\bkmkend _VV2835} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2836}here{\*\bkmkend _VV2836} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2837}in{\*\bkmkend _VV2837} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2838}Appleby{\*\bkmkstart _VV2839M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2838}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2839M} Enjoyable social evening in Dalston (
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2842}thanks{\*\bkmkend _VV2842} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2843}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2843} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2844}those{\*\bkmkend _VV2844} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2845}who{\*\bkmkend _VV2845} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2846}organised{\*\bkmkend _VV2846} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2847}it{\*\bkmkstart _VV2848M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2847}){\*\bkmkend _VV2848M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2849}is{\*\bkmkend _VV2849} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2850}interesting{\*\bkmkend _VV2850} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2851}that{\*\bkmkend _VV2851} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2852}none{\*\bkmkend _VV2852} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2853}other{\*\bkmkend _VV2853} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2854}people{\*\bkmkend _VV2854} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2855}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2855} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2856}spoke{\*\bkmkend _VV2856} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2857}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2857} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2858}mentioned{\*\bkmkend _VV2858} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2860}FMD{\*\bkmkstart _VV2861M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2860},{\*\bkmkend _VV2861M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2862}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2862} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2863}
didn't{\*\bkmkend _VV2863} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2864}either{\*\bkmkstart _VV2865M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2864}!{\*\bkmkend _VV2865M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2866}Is{\*\bkmkend _VV2866} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2867}it{\*\bkmkend _VV2867} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2868}that
{\*\bkmkend _VV2868} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2869}most{\*\bkmkend _VV2869} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2870}people{\*\bkmkend _VV2870} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2871}now{\*\bkmkend _VV2871} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2872}or{\*\bkmkend _VV2872} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2873}moving{\*\bkmkend _VV2873
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2874}forward{\*\bkmkstart _VV2875M}{\*\bkmkend _VV2874}?{\*\bkmkend _VV2875M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2876}Seem{\*\bkmkend _VV2876} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2877}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2877} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2878}be{\*\bkmkend _VV2878} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2879
}a{\*\bkmkend _VV2879} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2880}good{\*\bkmkend _VV2880} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2881}attendance{\*\bkmkend _VV2881} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2882}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2882} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2883}Appleby{\*\bkmkend _VV2883} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2884}Agricultural
{\*\bkmkend _VV2884} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2885}Show{\*\bkmkend _VV2885} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2886}even{\*\bkmkend _VV2886} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2887}though{\*\bkmkend _VV2887} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2888}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2888} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2889}only{\*\bkmkend _VV2889
} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2890}livestock{\*\bkmkend _VV2890} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2891}was{\*\bkmkend _VV2891} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2892}horses{\*\bkmkend _VV2892} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2893}and{\*\bkmkend _VV2893} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2894}poultry{\*\bkmkstart _VV2895M}
{\*\bkmkend _VV2894}.{\*\bkmkend _VV2895M} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2896}I{\*\bkmkend _VV2896} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2897}spoke{\*\bkmkend _VV2897} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2898}to{\*\bkmkend _VV2898} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2899}David{\*\bkmkend _VV2899} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2900}Ma}{
\insrsid11020451 c}{\insrsid15076854 lean{\*\bkmkend _VV2900} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2901}our{\*\bkmkend _VV2901} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2902}MP{\*\bkmkend _VV2902} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2903}at{\*\bkmkend _VV2903} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2904}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2904} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2905}show{\*\bkmkend _VV2905}, {\*\bkmkstart _VV2906}he{\*\bkmkend _VV2906} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2907}still{\*\bkmkend _VV2907} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2908}lamenting{\*\bkmkend _VV2908} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2909}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2909} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2910}Government's{\*\bkmkend _VV2910} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2911}inadequate{\*\bkmkend _VV2911} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2912}handling{\*\bkmkend _VV2912} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2913}of{\*\bkmkend _VV2913} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2914}the{\*\bkmkend _VV2914} 
{\*\bkmkstart _VV2915}crisis{\*\bkmkend _VV2915} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2916}last{\*\bkmkend _VV2916} {\*\bkmkstart _VV2917}year{\*\bkmkend _VV2917}.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 29
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Shop fairly bus
t this week, more family visitors visiting the area, better weather also!! On our day off we went to Carlisle for a tour around the old Crown Court, very interesting, also to the art exhibition at Tullie House called Love Labour Lost. This will also be sh
o
wn in Exeter, the other greatly affected area for FMD. The exhibition was rural painting depicting British livestock over the last 300 years and it was mounted in the wake of FMD. The exhibition has been well reviewed in the National press. I found it ver
y
 interesting and stimulating, there was also a small exhibition nearby of local artists, more of them were of the abstract type and featured FMD connections. I suppose in years to come pictorial evidence of the outbreak could be quite valuable, although o
f
 course there is the TV footage and press pictures. These days amongst our customers there is very little mention of FMD now. Regarding the Tullie House exhibition the Damien Hurst exhibit of the calf sawn in half preserved in formaldehyde was not pleasin
g in my opinion, not art.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 30
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Best trade for a Sunday this week for some time. Generally keeping up to previous years trading pre-FMD. Lovely day out on Tuesday, our day off, we went to Buttermere and walked around the lake. The whole week in the shop 
has been busy, especially Friday with visitors pre-holiday weekend. Much stock to unpack pre our holiday next Saturday. Just heard today that the caf\'e9 next door is closing from next Saturday \endash  I hope it\rquote s not correct as we don\rquote 
t need any more empty shops, especially next door! In the throws of becoming a Ltd Company which should reduce our income tax considerably since the chancellor announced that the first \'a3
20,000 of a small Ltd. Co. is tax free! Sounded too good to be true but our accountant confirmed this. Traders from the indoor market on Fridays (and sometimes Saturdays) says that trade just hasn\rquote t picked up since last year.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 31
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Last week of summer hols, busy with visitors. Bank holiday busy in Appleby with the trotting races (2 were cancelled this year because of wet weather and all last years because of FMD). Busy restocking in prep}{\insrsid11020451 a}{\insrsid15076854 
ration for our holiday. Visit to Border Fine Arts to discuss future plans for their marketing. Very pleases with the holiday trading this year, hope the Autumn and Christmas is as good as last year. Have just heard the caf\'e9 next door is to close 
\endash  the owners have been here for 5 years, but never really enjoyed it as they were farmers. Hopefully it won\rquote t be another empty premises, I think their trade has diminished \endash  not so many coaches these days, which the caf\'e9\rquote 
s depend upon.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 32
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
On holiday cruise through the Mediterranean, calling at Lisbon then onto Istanbul. Really enjoying the sun and the lectures and entertainment on board. Trying not to read the on board new
spaper but just read small article about Snowie Transport that each of the 4 }{\insrsid11020451 D}{\insrsid15076854 irectors have netted \'a3815,000 each out of FMD transport, the company receiving \'a342 mil}{\insrsid11020451 l}{\insrsid15076854 
ion in total! Were they related to Nick Brown or Gordon Brown or neither?
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 33
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Still on
 cruise calling at Yatta, Odessa in the Black Sea. Both very interesting places if not a little sad due to neglect of buildings and infrastructure. Met two families from Devon who didn\rquote 
t get FMD but were surrounded, and as up here, suffered due to not bein
g able to sell or move stock. They are going on the Countryside March in London, another small article in the ships paper regarding FMD and the fact that the EU will insist on vaccination in future and that no compensation will be forth coming if not comp
lied with. Also seems as though the Blair Government didn\rquote t handle the crisis well enough! Had an interesting discussion with the Devon farmers about the state of agriculture, they were very depressed about it all.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 34}{\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Bake from holiday this week very 
busy preparing to trade as a Ltd company to take advantage of tax concessions for small businesses announced in the budget. Cumbria FMD inquiry report out \endash  nothing we didn\rquote t suspect really, \lquote confusion disorder and delay\rquote 
 were the local newspaper headlines
. However, Cumbria County Council seemed determined to do their best to encourage the Government to take heed of the conclusions of the inquiry for the way ahead. The inquiry highlighted the effect felt by the non-farming sector. Our business really was m
ost fortunate in the end not to have been affected but as remarked before, much of the money earned from working for DEFRA I think found it\rquote 
s way back into the Cumbrian economy at Christmas and in the New Year. I note that they think that there should be fu
rther work into the emotional, social and mental health consequences of the FMD in Cumbria (they obviously listened to the report from Lancaster University!).
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 35
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Busy this week with stock valuation re Ltd. Company.  Interested to read our local Hera
ld that Dr Mark Levine from Lancaster University is doing research into causes of night-time violence in Cumbria.  It would seem to me to be fairly obvious that the main cause would be drink coupled with drugs?!!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Rather stressful few days trying to get everything organised OK for change over.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 36
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
No longer open on Sundays.  Out this Sunday to Borrowdale, a wonderful day driving there along Derwentwater could have been in the Italian Lakes!!  What incredible weather we are having.  Shop still quite bus
y.  The previous 12 months trade will be the best we\rquote 
ve had since we started 15 years ago - can it last?  Orders for Christmas are coming in nicely, although the last 2 weeks trading pre-Christmas will decide the overall picture for the Christmas period.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Have been rather irritated by inefficiency of bank and credit card companies in getting the new accounts set up for the Ltd. Co. still not completely right yet! 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 37
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Wonderful weather still.  Taken Jubilee bunting down in town at last.  Have now got t
o organise the sorting of the light bulbs in the Christmas lights in town!  Being bothered with junk faxes and e-mails - new technology!!!  Have registered to try to stop them.  Busy getting Christmas cards out in shop.  Trouble with shoulder - osteopath 
on Wednesday - hopefully will ease it.  Local sheep sales seem to be giving good prices for farmers.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 38
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Interesting talk at Rotary by the Samaritans - highlighted the number of calls from the farming community - among other things.  Foot and Mouth no 
longer comes up in conversation in the shop - hasn\rquote 
t for some time.  Now it seems to be the stock market low and return or lack of it, or investments, and the possibility of war.  It makes me shudder!  The thought of yet more innocent people being killed a
nd not the perpetrators of the crimes and leaders of the regimes.  I must admit to having \'93burying my head in the sand\'94 to remain in equilibrium and not worry.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 39
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Another interesting Rotary talk by the M.D. of the Auctioneers based in Carlisle.  He h
ighlighted the enormous effect of the shut down for nearly a year due to F&M.  Gradually getting back to some normality, but still suffering through low throughput of livestock in the market due to lower supply of animals in the country together with the 
20 day rule for movement.  Getting the Christmas stock into the shop.  People starting to buy presents!!!  Trade still very good.  Busy getting all the paperwork finished to submit to accountant for winding up the partnership.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 40
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Communication this we
ek from Business Link regarding the IT and marketing monies that we received re F&M.  Recovery, filling in information re financial situation of business lost F&M to evaluate if payments had helped.  Positive reply!!  Another letter stating that we receiv
ed \'a38,000 and saying that under EC Special rules, a SME could receive a maximum of \'a360,000 in a three year period if I understood correctly.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Had one or two substantial sales of Border Fine Arts pieces this week, could it be F&M money still, they were to 
farmers.  Interesting reports of a local swaledale}{\insrsid11020451  (sheep)}{\insrsid15076854  farm fetching \'a3
101,000 more to it than meets the eye perhaps!!  People reserving items for Christmas collection at quite good rate.  It will be very interesting to see if the Christmas trade is anywhere as good as last years, which was exceptional.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 41
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
By this time last year our monthly trading figures were far higher than previous years, having recovered from the earlier month.  This years figures for October and November are very encouraging up on last years at the moment, can we sustain I wonder?!  

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Several customers from farming, seem to be pleased with the level of livestock prices.
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 My wife attended a meeting where Ann Hopper of Radio Cumbria was speaking, interestingly, she made no men
tion of her role in the F&M coverage nor were there any questions.  G}{\insrsid16132697  }{\insrsid15076854 would have liked to have asked some question - but she didn\rquote t either, seeing as Ann Hopper hadn\rquote t mentioned it!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 42
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 F&M in the news again with DEFRA not wanting to pay up all the
 contracting money that it owes to various people, disputing the rates they agreed.  Seems that everyone is discussing the Paul Burrell trial and its collapse!!  What a scary state of affairs it all is.  The Monarchy certainly doesn\rquote 
t seem to come out of it at all well.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Shop a bit slack this week but a few very good sales anyway.  Trying to work up enthusiasm to get the town Christmas lights organised - always difficult to get peoples help.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Difficulties with my brother yet again re his depression etc. 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid16132697 \page }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 43
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Rather slack in the shop this week.  Interesting article in the Cumberland News where a farming family have used \'a3
6,000 from the Marketing grant to set up an internet site which has proved very successful to sell their wooden products that now constitute a new part of their business.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Rather nice story of good coming out of F&M.  A friend whose wife died at the young age of 40 about six years ago rented his cottage to a family during the crisis because he lived in the town and his sister who\rquote s 
cottage they should have stayed in lived on a farm.  The divorced mother of the family was a long standing friend of the sister and my friend knew her thirty years ago.  They seem to have become very close and as my friend was very distressed for some 4/5
 years over his wife\rquote s death its really good to see him happy again.  The only trouble is that they live 300 miles apart.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 44
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Shop trade similar to last years still.  I have my doubts about sales being as good as last Christmas though.  Interesting sni
ppet on Borders TV re the gene bank for Herdwick sheep - but didn\rquote t catch it all.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 45
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Difficulties with my brother down south again - don\rquote 
t think it will ever resolve itself - a terrible illness this true depression.  We can only support him to a certain level.  
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Our friends with the Guest House who suffered last year, are on holiday in Jamaica - hope the sunshine will perk up the husband who has been suffering with depression of sorts.  Still not sure if it\rquote s a direct result of F&M.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }{\b\insrsid15076854 Week 46
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Shop inc
reasingly busy. Getting Christmas cards from friends in South.  Many enquiring about how things are post F&M.  One particular local shop feels that not so much money around this year as there was last.  At the present time we cannot say as we are more or 
l
ess similar to last year, but the last two weeks can make all the difference both ways!  Generally F&M is no longer mentioned.  Famous last words!!  Farmers wife in today with 3 children 11-22, all showing signs of difficulties of withdrawal and lack of c
onfidence since April.  They got F&M and all 3 youngsters are having counselling and are on medication.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 47
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Christmas trade slightly below last year to date, but the last few days can make all the difference! It\rquote s interesting how one gets a buzz from a
 busy day in the shop, selling items across the range from what we stock. It makes us feel that we must be getting much of the buying right!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 48
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Yet another report on FMD. The European report seems to say there was a lot wrong with how our Government handled the crisis, but of course Dr King only comments on the positive side of the findings.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 49
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Christmas sales have now exceeded last years! I can never tell until we close the door on Christmas Eve. We are really pleased, especially as at this tim
e of year most buyers are local. We other free gift wrapping if required and the men especially are always pleased! Many women are too! The shop is looking quite empty. We had Christmas dinner out at a local hotel so really enjoyed the two day break.

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 50 11/01/03}{\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Could get really depressed about Iraq war possibility. Possible lots of innocent lives as always in these situations, but choose to try and not think about it. Rather worrying also in the pension/investments situation, no light at the end of t
he tunnel yet, but so far the last years figures so we are very fortunate. We are in a strong position is there is a turn down.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 51 18/01/03
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Can it really be two years since FMD started. Horrible how quickly time goes. With regard to the \lquote art and recording public events\rquote  article, I did see the Tullie House exhibition and commented on it in my diary entry. It wasn\rquote 
t only FMD of course, but I think I found the 2 or 3 paintings concerning FMD to be acceptable at the time. I think as time goes by various p
aintings I thought not acceptable at the time could become acceptable as an interesting visual record - we do of course also have photographs. We are busy restocking the shop and I look forward to getting some completely new lines - every year it becomes 
more difficult to find them though.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 52
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 It\rquote 
s surprising how FMD occasionally keeps cropping up. We had a rotary planning meeting for our annual fun run, which of course didn\rquote t happen in 2001, and I came across letters giving guidelines as to whether or not we could hold it.
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11020451 
\par }{\insrsid15076854 Week 57 28/02/03
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 New gift shop opening in Appleby this week, it hopefully won\rquote 
t affect us as they intend to stock mainly \lquote modern goods\rquote . Also another empty store going to be a delicatessen and the empty Indian restaurant turning into a }{\insrsid16132697 C}{\insrsid15076854 hinese, so it\rquote 
s all good for the town. A massage and beauty shop is also opening so things are looking up, perhaps as far as town shops are concerned.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\insrsid15076854 Week 63 12/04/03\line }{\insrsid15076854 We\rquote ve had a few days in Dumfries and Galloway. I was amazed at the number of large
 dairy herds grazing. Outside one farm was a large granite block with the name of the pedigree Holstein herd that had obviously been culled and it was dated April 2001 and the inscription read \lquote Just gone to grass\rquote 
. Quite a chilling reminder of what had happened and an indication of perhaps how this farmer dealt with his loss.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 Week 65
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid15076854 
Heard this week that the Great Orton site is to become a nature reserve and that a memorial stone will be placed there giving information about the burials re FMD. A very good
 use of the site and I hope that eventually farmers who lost their animals may feel that once it is established they are able to visit. I visited the site some months after FMD burials had finished and I found the desolation of the bare earth disturbing a
n
d upsetting, but perhaps once it becomes covered in trees and vegetation once will loose that feeling. My wife has written to the PM re the SARS outbreak reminding him of the chaos in Cumbria regarding FMD and suggesting he doe not let a similar thing hap
pen how!!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 66 03/05/03
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Interesting to see some of the recommendations put before parliament by DEFRA in the event of a FMD outbreak. The main headline in our local paper was those footpaths were to be kept open except in exceptional circumstances, alth
ough if you read on there will be many situations when they would be closed. It also says that protective vaccinations would be considered in certain circumstances \endash 
 hedging their bets again!! Incineration said to be the main way at dealing with slaughtered animals but not mass pyres! What sort of incineration I wonder. It all seemed a bit woolly to me, but I haven\rquote t read the whole report!
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 67
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 We\rquote ve has two customers this week asking if we are recovering after the FMD \endash  interesting that it should be in
 their mind after 2 years, they were visitors. Our daughters off with work related stress is now improving and hopefully will be back to work when the hospital has relocated her to another dept. Have just heard that our best friend of some 40 years standi
ng, is also off work with work related stress, she works with social services. It seems symptomatic of life today that so many people suffer work related stress.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 68
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 We were not able to get to }{\insrsid11020451 G}{\insrsid15076854 reat Orton after all. Saw the report on Border TV at the }{\insrsid11020451 W}{
\insrsid15076854 atchtree nature reserve}{\cs20\super\insrsid15076854 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\cs20\super\insrsid399300 \chftn }{\insrsid399300  Through consultations with}{\cf1\insrsid399300  the Environment Agency (EA), the British Army and  MAFF (now part of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), }{\insrsid399300 
 Watchfield a  former WW11 airfield site, }{\cf1\insrsid399300 was sel
ected as a mass 2001 FMD, culling and disposal site.  The airfield is located about  15 km to the west of Carlisle and covers an  area of land of about 83 hectares (ha), approximately 50 ha of which, have been used for burials.  In 2002, Watchtree Nature 
Reserve was formed.  In May 2003, there was a memorial service and an unveiling of a memorial stone that commemorates the  hundreds of thousands of livestock buried there.  For further information, please see  }{\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst {
\cf1\insrsid399300  HYPERLINK "http://www.watchtree.com/" }{\cf1\insrsid399300 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000001a00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e007700610074006300680074007200650065002e0063006f006d002f000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b3400000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e0077006100
74006300680074007200650065002e0063006f006d002f00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs23\ul\cf2\insrsid399300 http://www.watchtree.com/}}}{\cf1\insrsid399300 , last accessed 30/03/06.}}}{\insrsid15076854 
, were surprised that there were so few people there. The group meeting at the George was interesting, although I think I understood the summary of the 4 categories that the information had been broken down into in the written form 
better than the chart! However on further study I think that the chart gives a greater knowledge of the complexities of each area as far as I can see everything is covered! I am full of admiration for the way all the information has been interpreted. It w
as interesting to see that the vet at our group meeting still gets emotionally affected when debating the condition over FMD.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 69
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Attended a Cumbria Community Foundation promotional evening at Davenby Hall Cockermouth, where the Ford Rally cars are pre
pared. The event was to get business to be a corporate member. There is a balance sheet for the Cumbria Community Recovery Fund re FMD, \'a32.1 million raised and all of it has been distributed. 685 grants of around \'a3
1000 to farm-related businesses, 392 to non-farm related, 131 to community groups, 182 to special projects, \'a3
50,000 to projects relating to long-term health impacts. 93% of individual businesses supported have survived, 99% of community groups supported have achieved their objectives. I was very s
ceptical about this fund at the time, but it would seem to have done a great deal of good.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 70
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 Young student from Lancaster University doing a reasonably in-depth survey of the forthcoming horse fair, quite a task for her alone! Trying to find out for
 the town council/chamber of trade and fair committee more accurate details of those attending, benefit or not to the town trade, inconvenience and difficulties experienced all round. Traffic problems etc. Not sure whether she will end up with anything me
aningful! But it will be interesting.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 71
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
Now into the Horse Fair very, very busy time. Weather ok this year, apart from the Sunday. No problems with visitors! Good to see many yearly friends and customers, but sad that several of the old people have d
ied since last year. The next generation have obviously on to living in houses. I don\rquote t have the same outlook.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par Week 72
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 I think this is the last diary? I have found the experience of keeping the diary quite interesting, but generally have found I have had 
to really search for FMD related topics. I have really enjoyed the interchange of information with I}{\insrsid13448004  }{\insrsid15076854 and I generally found our talks stimulating. It\rquote 
s also been interesting to be part of an extensive survey (the first time) and see how the information is correlated. I\rquote m sure it will be very interesting to attend the conference and see all the ends tied together! Good luck to you all.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid15076854 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par  
\par }}