{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1649679\rsid1917367\rsid2053507\rsid3345959\rsid6058118\rsid7412215\rsid9833235\rsid10712986}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\author UKDA}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min53}{\version7}{\edmins7}{\nofpages29}{\nofwords7246}{\nofchars41303}{\*\company UKDA}{\nofcharsws48453}
{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin2552\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot7412215 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid9833235 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9833235 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9833235 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9833235 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\fs20\insrsid9833235 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid7412215 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid9833235 
\par Interview ID:  PM26
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid9833235 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid10712986 6}}}{\cs17\insrsid9833235 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid9833235 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid9833235 Date of Interview: 01/03/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid9833235 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Date of birth: 1971
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 Occupation: Group 4}{\cs21\f0\super\insrsid9833235 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\f0\fs20\super\insrsid9833235 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid9833235  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid9833235 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid9833235 Geographic region: North Cumbria}{\insrsid9833235 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \s16\qj \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\insrsid9833235 
I had agreed to meet I at his work-place.  He greeted me warmly and ushered me into a small office which had a glass front, looking out onto a large open-plan office.  I sat in a comfortable chair and faced I across his desk. There was no room to rearrang
e the furniture.  I swivelled on his chair and  played with his pen. On two occasions a colleague burst through the office door and needed I's attention.  I became flustered but I reassured him.  This was his work environment, I was the intruder.
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Can you tell me a bit about yourself and your background?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par I\rquote m thirty.  I live at H and we use to live at Scaleby.  We farm at home.  I\rquote ve been here all my life.  Worked here fourteen years.  High school, left school on the Wednesday started here on the Monday so it\rquote 
s been quite a stretch. We  were closed for a year.  Myself I just enjoy all sorts.  Do plays, I love travelling round the country.  Reading.  Just generally like enjoyed myself.  Still at the age to do it, I\rquote 
ve got no children, not married, so I can just bomb around and do what I want.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So your parents farm, do they?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235  My parents farm at Scaleby.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 And they\rquote re still farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well we lost all our stock to foot and mouth and today [EMPHASIS] believe it or not, the 1}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 st}{\f0\insrsid9833235  of March, we\rquote ve just finished our fou
r month period yesterday [ cleaning after foot and mouth] so we can actually have stock on the farm today, so it\rquote s arriving up tomorrow, and four wagon loads [LAUGHTER]
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  Is it a mixed farm?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par It is, yes.  There\rquote s actually two farms.  My father is in partnership with the brothers but they\rquote re all split up now, it\rquote s an opportunity for them to go their own way.  So as I say, it\rquote s a mixed farm, it\rquote 
s got a little bit of everything on.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 So obviously you\rquote 
re in a farming related business, but you personally didn\rquote t want to go into farming?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid9833235 No, no.  I\rquote ve got a brother C; he\rquote 
s not interested in farming either.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 You\rquote ve got other brothers and sisters?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, there is just the two of us.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 And neither of you are interested in Farming so it\rquote s just your parents?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes just my parents.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Do they worry about what\rquote s going to happen?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Not really.  They\rquote ve never been concerned.  The position at home has always been a strange one, because with their being a partnership, and with my grandparents still being in the partnersh
ip, its never sort of been perceived as being our farm, so the fact that neither of us wanted to follow on was like, oh well.  They\rquote re quite happy about it really, and the way farming\rquote s gone I think they were even more happy, we\rquote 
ve decided to get away from it, particularly my brother.  I\rquote ve sort of got back into it slightly; I\rquote ve kept a hand in.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Once your parents retire, what\rquote s going to happen to the farm then?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Once my parents retire the farm will be sold, that will be it. [PAUSE]   Retire to a nice little seaside bungalow somewhere [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 You don\rquote t have regrets about that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No.  As I say, it\rquote s not an interest that was ever there when I was a kid, so if it\rquote s not there you can\rquote t feed it, you can\rquote t learn to be interested.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But you obviously have a lot of background knowledge?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well yeh, you\rquote re brought up with it.  It\rquote s like, I suppose if your father was a racing driver, you would know everything about racing cars there was to know but it doesn\rquote t mean you\rquote 
re going to jump in a car and go for it.  It\rquote s just inherent knowledge.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par Did your parents ever speak about the 67/ 68 outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No. My parents, they were sort of teen
agers really at that time, sort of early twenties.  My Grandmother use to talk about it a lot, she knew about it, and my Granddad as well on the other side of the family.  They were both quite well informed and well up on it.
\par Well it did, it broke my Grandad\rquote s heart really. It wasn\rquote t like this back then.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par Were they affected by it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No.  Round here it really only got as far as the Post-House hotel, it never pushed any further west of the county.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Did they make comparisons between then and now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Just really [PAUSE]\'85
 they kept coming out with, it was never like this then, you know, bury them on the farm covered them in lime and be done with it.  So they never went any further into it really.  Even when we got taken out [culled] at home.  It wasn\rquote t like this ba
ck then.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So what was your first memory of the recent outbreak?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Was in here.  It was about the Tuesday and word got through from Maff over the road there was a suspected case down in Essex.  Then we thought, oh well, that\rquote s three hundred mile away, its goi
ng to be fine.  Then it gradually worked up the country and then come the Friday they linked it back to Longtown mart.  That was it, we were closed, the Friday.  The sale we\rquote re having today was the last sale that we had, last year.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So you had a sale on the Friday?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 We had a sale on the Friday and then that was it, they closed all the live stock marts.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Was that sale any different to what they normally are at that time of year?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Not really, no.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Were there any rumours or ripples?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Not really, no.  It\rquote s funny because we\rquote ve seen sort of two bits of this.  As I say, last year, that time, there wasn\rquote t any real concern. Now this week, as particular people decided to do [PAUSE]\'85  there\rquote 
s foot and mouth case suspected, now as soon as that was mentioned this [EMPHASIS]  week, even though there\rquote 
s been about a dozen of those in the last three weeks, that never hit the headlines.  As soon as that was mentioned, everyone was nervy.  Lots of  phone calls.  The switchboard was inundated here wanting to know if we were open
, had the rules changed.  Last year it was nothing, you know, until the marts were closed, then people realised this is going to be quite\'85 Then the following week we were all called in here, a hundred of us, went onto half time, fifty percent pay.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 That was immediate was it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Immediate, yes, because we were working live on a very small commission basis here.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So was there a sense then that it might go on for a little while?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
No.  We planned for ten weeks.  We sat down and did the books and planned for ten weeks.  We thought, well right, ten weeks half pay, we can survive on that and then if we get ok on ten weeks, we get another ten weeks, have another ten weeks, it was going
 to be half pay again and then once we started getting back into profit, we could claw back what pay you\rquote d given up over the twenty weeks.  It was either , all or nothing situation, it was either take this or we\rquote 
re  going to have to lay all of us off.  It was immediate.  It was within seven days of being closed down.  The second week, when it came round, Defra over the road struggling for staff as they were, came over and said, look, we\rquote 
ve got positions for staff, have you got you any staff to give us.  It was great, we said, right, have the whole office, we need two core people in here and the rest you can have.  So we pushed everybody over to }{\f0\insrsid10712986 D}{
\f0\insrsid9833235 efra.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So everyone was seconded?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Everyone was seconded to Defra.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 On a full time basis?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 On a full time basis, quite a lot of them and the ones that were left, M, myself, H}{\f0\insrsid3345959  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
down the corridor and ML, we did a two and a half day job share.  We all did two and a half days a week but two different jobs. M}{\f0\insrsid3345959 L}{\f0\insrsid9833235  and I shared one job, M}{\f0\insrsid3345959 L}{\f0\insrsid9833235  and H
 shared another job.  So I did Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday morning, M}{\f0\insrsid3345959 L}{\f0\insrsid9833235  would do Wednesday afternoon, Thursday, Friday.  They weren\rquote 
t too keen about that over the road but as I said, this is the kind of people you get, it\rquote s going to be fine; and it was fine.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So in terms of you personally, you had gone down to half time, half pay, did you do anything else with the rest of the half time that you had left?
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par I went down to half time, we were just on that for basically a fortnight and then we were straight into the secondment.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So what was that like?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 It was weird at first, but coming from farming stock, I know what the Ministry is like.  They are perceived as being absolute duck eggs in the farming community; it\rquote s just paperwork, paperwork, paperwork. So we ha
d a chat in here before we went over and said, look, people over there [PAUSE]\'85 you\rquote ve just got to basically go in and act confident with them.  Just go in, this is who I am, this is what I do, I\rquote m in charge [PAUSE]\'85
 because quite a lot of us were taken over there as COs (Commanding Officer\}.  Defra seconded quite a lot of their staff over from other areas.  So we just sat in here all of us, we said right, we\rquote 
ve just got to go in, be confident; and we did.  Everyone just went in, and it was like, right, we\rquote re here, we\rquote re in charge, this is what we do.  It was a bit intimidating [LAUGHTER]  you didn\rquote 
t know whether [PAUSE]   they might have only had a job for us for a fortnight, you could have been back on to half time here at any time [PAUSE], and that\rquote s the option we still have.  Four over there now,  they shout to come back, but we don
\rquote t have the work for them to do at the moment. So we still have people seconded there. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Do you know how long that\rquote s likely to last?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 We don\rquote t.  Fortunately the ones that are left over there are in the finance department, so finance is one of the last things to wind down because there\rquote 
s still wages to pay, still expenses to pay, still bills coming in, still expenses for hotels, so hopefully another three or four months.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So the period when you were down to skeleton staff quite early on in the outbreak, what was the bulk of your everyday work then?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 At the start, it was really just chasing up old debt, chasing up debt that hadn\rquote t been paid.  Because the way we work here it\rquote s on a fortnight role and it\rquote s really just chasing up debt that hadn\rquote 
t been paid, but then after a fortnight, three weeks it was just polishing debts, you know, tidying up.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So you weren\rquote t inundated with calls?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well about the third or fourth week, maybe e
ven more, we got involved in the voluntary cull [PAUSE].  They decided to base the voluntary cull in this [EMPHASIS] office, and they wanted a team of twenty people in here to ring all the farmers and say, look we\rquote 
re ringing up for the voluntary cull, would you like to offer your sheep for cull.  It was like oh yes, no, oh yes no.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So presumably you\rquote re ringing up people you know?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 People we knew, customers.  I rang my parents up [PAUSE], you know, because our sheep went on the cull first, and I rang my parents up [EMPHASIS] and said this is how it is.  Because our sheep actually went on the 10}{
\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235  of April, the cattle went down on the 24}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235 , so we sort of went through it twice at home, but you\rquote 
re ringing people up in here who you see at the counter every day [PAUSE],  every day [EMPHASIS]   you\rquote re saying, do you want to give up 600 sheep with lambs.  Oh heartbreaking.  More so for them and then you thought well it\rquote s something that
\rquote s got to be done  [LONG PAUSE]   because there was a strong feeling that enough wasn\rquote t being done and it had to be.  So we ran that for about five weeks in here.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So this is where  there\rquote d been an IP[infected premises]  and they were taken out\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 All the sheep within three kilometres.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Right.
\par 
\par And was it voluntary?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 It changed.  It changed so many times.  It started off it was voluntary, do you want to, and then you would get [PAUSE]  there was a lass called Katy M suppose to be running it\'85 and then you\rquote 
d get a call at four o clock on Thursday, it\rquote s compulsory, so then it\rquote s changed, it\rquote s compulsory your sheep are [EMPHASIS] going and then maybe Saturday, Sunday, oh no it\rquote s not, can\rquote 
t get the legislation through.  It swung, tick, tock, we never knew.  Now they have said, it\rquote s compulsory.  The Government have gone on the record and its compulsory and it\rquote s open to an appeal procedure.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 And in fact there are a few farmers at least aren\rquote t there?}{\f0\insrsid9833235  
\par 
\par Which makes me angry as well, really, because these farmers, you know\'85 I know particularly one, that\rquote s creating a lot of grief about it.  He\rquote s got a million and he\rquote s foot and mouth and I think there\rquote 
s another thirty pound available, so they\rquote re going to court over it, and you think, get a grip.  It obviously meant nothing  [PAUSE].   
\par 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\tx6480\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, it sort of went, it was compulsory, it wasn\rquote t compulsory, it was voluntary, it wasn\rquote 
t voluntary.  It was quite odd because we did that in here for five weeks, and as I say, when we were at Defra, we were put into a similar job, but it was the blood testing down in Penrith spur, they organised that on a grid system.  
Oh they were faffing over there about what to do.  It was really quite odd, because we\rquote d organised it in here, we knew [EMPHASIS] what systems were for ringing people, especially with people ringing back.  You know, you\rquote 
ve got three thousand bits of paper, you need to sort out when people ring back.  Mark and I\'85 It was when we were on the cross over on Wednesday\'85
 we said, look, this is what you need to do, do it this way and it will be fine. So we just put the system in place, and within a week we had it done, they\rquote 
d rang everyone that needed to be done.  The person taking the return calls knew exactly where upon paper [PAUSE].  It was just so [EMPHASIS]   sorted.  There was a lot of disorganisation with things like that.
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Were you dealing with stressed people?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, tearful people as well.   I think on a level, people were more acceptable of us [EMPHASIS]  ringing than if someone from Defra had rang.
\par 
\par [SOMEBODY KNOCKING ON DOOR.  TAPE SWITCHED OFF]
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 We\rquote ve seen a lot in here
.  See when the cull finished, when we were really busy over  there, we got moved around two or three departments over there.  Surveillance ,  blood testing and the cleansing and disinfecting, and in the end they moved us into finance auditing, which is a
bsolute dregs, it really was, but come the end of September, October, they said, right you\rquote 
re needed back over here because then people were planning for forward sort of purchasing the stock back then, to move now.  So into contracts and paperwork, three of
 us doing the work of about twenty [PAUSE].  Looking back now it was quite easy really, because we opened last week, and when you\rquote re brain has to start thinking again. I\rquote 
ve been so tired for the last ten days [LAUGHTER] I thought, oh please [PAUSE].  It\rquote s not passed but when you talk amongst people you think, well you know, it was an experience.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Getting on to the more personal, how were your parents throughout all this?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 My parents [PAUSE] difficult [LONGISH PAUSE].  My partner C, she can never understand, because I don\rquote t show a lot of emotion really, at anything, I never have done, that\rquote s just the way I\rquote 
ve been brought up.  Well when the sheep first went, I think that was the most traumatic day because between the two farms, we [EMPHASIS]  had most of the 
sheep at our farm, and the other farm had most of cattle, and when the sheep went that was a real traumatic day and that would be a Tuesday.  At that point I said, right we\rquote 
ll have Mum and Dad down for a meal.  So I got them down, cooked a meal and as I sa
y, the cattle went and their way of sort of getting by it really was, as I say, Mum took the dogs for a walk and Dad just helped them drag the carcasses away as they shot them.  But even now [EMPHASIS]  when you speak [PAUSE]\'85
  well if you speak to Mam especially [PAUSE]\'85    when you talk about it, it\rquote s still emotional, whereas me Dad\rquote s very\'85 well it\rquote s happened you\rquote ve got to get on.  He\rquote 
s been looking forward to today for so [EMPHASIS]  long, if you ask him about it he says, well we\rquote ll see, we\rquote ll see.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Had they put themselves into voluntary isolation?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No.  We [EMPHASIS]  sort of put them into voluntary isolation really [LAUGHTER].   Well with working at the auction mart especially, I didn\rquote t want to be travelling back.  But where I am, as I say, I live in H,
 so it was it was a lot easier for them to come by me, just park the car at the end of the road and walk in.  Whereas me taking the car back, we live sort of two miles off the road at home so\'85 we didn\rquote 
t go into that and by the time we actually got confirmed, there was only a forty-eight hour isolation period anyway.  You know, they both said the same thing; at the end of the day you\rquote 
ve still got to live [PAUSE].  I think the people that have really suffered are [EMPHASIS]   the people that locked themselves into isolation for four, five or six months [PAUSE],  because they\rquote 
ve lived with the telephone, what they saw on the news, and they\rquote ve been driven absolutely crazy.  But you know, they just carried on as normal, they just travelled, like shopping\'85 they didn\rquote 
t do as much of it, but they did it.  As we got it at home, we live on the Longtown Brampton road and when it started to come along that road you could see it coming like a fire wall, it was bang, bang, that farm, that farm, that farm that farm, and it 
was just like well it\rquote s going to come.  Dad said many a time I wish now we\rquote 
d just got it.  He says, the agony of waiting for it is just killing us, and then bang, bang, bang and that was it.  We were the last farm along the road to go out.  We should have 
actually got taken out earlier as a direct contact as it were.  We shared the fields and the river with the farm that went down as an IP, went down about four or five weeks earlier, but basically defra didn\rquote 
t have the staff to come and take us out as a DC [dangerous contact].
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par That must have been a potential\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 That\rquote s right.  We knew then [EMPHASIS]    that that was our holding.  Me Dad said they\rquote re going to come, they\rquote re going to come, and it was only later when [EMPHASIS]    they came to slaughter the stoc
k as an actual IP.  They said, we\rquote d have taken you out weeks ago but we didn\rquote 
t have the staff to do it [PAUSE]  and that was likewise with the other farm, H, the farm next to it went down as an IP, and then we got slaughtered about five days later and they said the same thing to me Dad\rquote 
s brother, we would have been back but there was no one to do it.  So the IPs were overtaken, actual direct contacts.   But no, my parents didn\rquote t isolate themselves; they\rquote re not those kind of people.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Did they have friends who did?  Presumably their social life was a bit upside down, was it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 It was.  Where we live at home, there\rquote s an old track goes from the back of the house to the back of the pub in the next village. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 That\rquote s handy.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Its very handy [LAUGHTER],  believe me
, we had a quad bike back there, it was very very handy.   That track really was the social life.  Jump on the quad bike, it was always parked against the river, which is about five hundred yards from the farm, take it up to the pub, see who you wanted to
 see and come back.  They didn\rquote t make sort of specific visiting runs.  The only person who they\rquote d really go and visit would be my Grandmother who lived at Silloth.  Now my mum\rquote s sister lived down the road from her and she wouldn
\rquote t [EMPHASIS]  leave the farm, but that was more of her I\rquote m being a martyr, when she wanted to leave she did leave.  But there wasn\rquote 
t any of their friends totally locked themselves in.  I think In this area, the general area as in around Longtown, they were more expectant of it and they knew there was nothing you could do about it, they were more acceptable, that well, you\rquote 
re going to get it, you\rquote re going to get it, whereas south, until it really got into Penrith, west coast, they didn\rquote t have it specifically in that area, and they sort of thought, well if we close our doors, it\rquote 
s not going to get here, whereas up here everybody realised well it doesn\rquote t matter whether you close your doors or not, you\rquote re going to get it.  When we got it, Aunty rang the farm next door. Now they\rquote d been in i
solation.   The farm next door to H, the land runs for about half a mile right at the side of the road it all runs parallel with each other, and she rang them on the morning she had a confirmed, and said, \'93I\rquote m just ringing you to let you know we
\rquote ve had a cow go down this morning and the vets coming out.\'94  The guys response was, \'93oh shit\'94, and put the phone down, and that was it, they\rquote 
ve never been out of the house. That was April, so three months they never left the farm.  We went down on the Tuesday they went down on the Thursday.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Have they since made contact?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Oh yes.  His reaction was just put the phone down.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So your father and his brother actually manage the two farms. Do they go back another generation to your grandparents?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 My grandparents, yes they owned one of the farms and they bought the second farm.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Do they go back further?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I don\rquote t think it does, no.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So it\rquote s a sort of a two-generation business really?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes.  They\rquote ve always been in the area but not on those two particular farms.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 What about your mother, because you said her sister also farms?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 That\rquote s right yes.  My Mum\rquote s from farming background at Silloth.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 None of them have travelled very far?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No it\rquote s very county\'85 well my father\rquote s side of the family are all from K area, from three and a bit generations back, and they\rquote re all that area.  My mum\rquote s side of the family they\rquote re from B and they
\rquote ve sort of moved round a little bit but not hundreds of miles.  They sort of see a better farm up the road so\'85 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 You said your brother is not related to farming at all now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 He\rquote s into steel erection.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is he still in the county?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, he travels all over the country.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But he visits regularly?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Oh yes, he comes back every weekend.  He\rquote s got his own house. He\rquote s bought himself a house, thought he would move out, realised he actually spent more time in other parts of the country than he did at home, so he\rquote 
s finished the house, he\rquote s renting it out and comes back to live at home at the weekend [LAUGHTER]. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So is he younger than you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 He is, He\rquote s five years, he\rquote s twenty-five.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is your partner related to farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 She is, yes.  She\rquote s from down at Whitehaven.  Now, I think it was actually harder for her than it was for me because I\rquote m only five miles from home; her parents are fifty miles from home.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 And not good roads. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, she actually worked at W news, she works at C, reporter on the C.   She moved up here a week after it started, change of jobs, new area, living in a rented house at the time, knew no one excep
t myself and she never got home for three months. In the end, the way it sort of broke the ice and we did go down was that her Dad got taken to hospital with the heart, and it was like some things are more important.  That was it, we started going down on
 a regular basis.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is that a mixed farm?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 It is yes.  It\rquote s quite a large concern, predominately dairy but they took sheep for people over the winter.  They really got caught out, they had quite a lot of sheep on  for people and they couldn\rquote t move them off. 
 They had to feed them, look after them, and even to the lambing stage.   It did become quite an in-joke because we\rquote ve always had sheep at home 
\par 
\par [INTERRUPTED BY SOMEBODY ENTERING THE ROOM].  
\par 
\par No, it was generally a bit of a joke because they had these sheep on for the winter, we\rquote ve lost our sheep, Cs Mum and Dad knew nothing about lambing sheep and my dad knew everything.  I said its fine just get dad down he\rquote 
ll pitch a tent in the field, lamb the sheep and wont be a problem.  But in the end they did get them away. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I presume the owner must have been frantic.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 He wasn\rquote t bothered, somebody else was looking after his sheep, he [EMPHASIS]  wasn\rquote t bothered.  So really stuck in a hole, so it was hard for them not being used to working the sheep.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 C your partner, was her Dad\rquote s heart problems did she think was it  anything to do with the stress?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well no. You don\rquote t know, he just went in, they wired him up, stayed in a night, they didn\rquote t know what it was, in the end sent him out.  They couldn\rquote t pin it down to anything.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But did he himself say anything?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, no.  He just said he wasn\rquote t feeling too good in the afternoon, took him in, straight in and just saw nothing really.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Do you know if he\rquote s got a history of heart disease?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 The family has a history of heart problems.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par Do you think all the changes and everything you had to deal with directly affected your health?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Last year up to the end of June, July, we were coming in here like zombies [PAUSE].  You weren\rquote t sleeping for a start.  You looked at peopl
e, and how people reacted to people as well.  When it very first broke out, we let some lambs out one morning at home, and one of them just a bit lame, one of the first signs, so I said to them in here, look, we\rquote 
ve had a lamb gone away for testing.  People didn\rquote t know whether they could talk to you and you felt like an absolute leper.  You\rquote 
d come in here, just close the doors, and you thought, oh please.  But as it went on, and more it just became accepted, and then DH a guy out of here, he went down about 
the end of March, he was like one of the first staff to go down, it was like the ice broke.  It was only then [EMPHASIS] when someone went down [EMPHASIS]  that people\'85 David was like, phew thank God, he says I\rquote 
ve never slept for six weeks.  Then when people start talking about it, you know, they haven\rquote t slept, they just haven\rquote t felt like going out.  It became a routine, every second night, you\rquote d go from here, go over to Tesco\rquote 
s, get a bottle of wine and you\rquote d go home and you\rquote d just try [EMPHASIS]   and switch off.  That almost sounds like people were alcoholics, but it wasn\rquote t a case of that, I just think it got to a point where you weren\rquote 
t sleeping and you were just fed-up with it and you thought that was it, just stop in the house.  
\par 
\par [INTERRUPTED BY SOMEONE ENTERING THE ROOM].   
\par 
\par So that was the routine.  From here you went to Tesco\rquote s, and it became a joke that you would go to Tesco\rquote s and you\rquote d meet everyone that you\rquote d seen in the day because they\rquote 
re all wandering up and down the wine aisle looking for a bottle of wine to take home, and that was brought up at that meeting the other week.  Everyone was the same, go home and have a drink. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I must admit I often felt like smoking.  I\rquote m not anti smoking or anything but there\rquote s times when you just thought [PAU
SE]  phew.  But rocketing alcohol consumption, and eating more as well [PAUSE]  comfort eating.  You go out and you just buy rubbish [EMPHASIS].  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Again there were big extremes weren\rquote t there, of those who ate more than they normally would and those that couldn\rquote t [emphasis] eat.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yeh, and those who couldn\rquote t eat [PAUSE].  It sort of blew us apart really in here for a start because when we went over to maff, it became a fight [EMPHASIS] at the start.  Everyone thought, right, this place, 
there is never going to be this number of staff required again, it became a fight, everyone was just after number one and from being a very close team\'85  I say, myself, I\rquote ve been here fourteen years and you\rquote 
re really very much a family and all of a sudden everyone was very much on their own, if you went to talk to somebody you didn\rquote t know whether they were going to snap, they were going to ignore you [PAUSE]  and it\rquote 
s not conducive to a good working\'85  with that time there wasn\rquote t work happening anyway, but then as I say, went over to defra and when we came back over, people bonded very quickly because people realised, you know, that you\rquote 
re needed.  We need to be working together, it was no good working apart, you had to be working together, but you know, do people wanna talk to me, or\'85 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 What is your official role?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Assistant Finance Manager [PAUSE]  debt collector [CHUCKLE]  That\rquote s what I do.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So people do come to you [emphasis] that\rquote s your role and staff come to you? 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par Yes. 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  And you\rquote re dealing in a quite sensitive area as well?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I\rquote m not Manager of the office, but you get seen as someone to come and talk to}{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 [PAUSE] which, it doesn\rquote t bother me.  I\rquote 
ve always been a person who can sit and listen to people, and I can sit and talk to people [PAUSE] and yet [PAUSE]  emotionally, things don\rquote t sort of generally get to me, I\rquote ve always been quite cold in that sense.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But who do you [emphasis] go to?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Who do I [EMPHASIS]   go to [PAUSE] in here [PAUSE]  if I have an emotional problem. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No one really.  If anyone [EMPHASIS]  I would go to M, who is almost our , personal department, she\rquote s mainly there, and that\rquote s quite good because that\rquote s who you should be going to.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Throughout that critical period did you feel\'85 [PAUSE]  It sounds like there\rquote s survival tactics going on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 It is yeh.  Throughout that critical period you can go and talk to anyone.  You didn\rquote t, you went [PAUSE] you\rquote d go home, sometimes we didn\rquote 
t even talk about it [PAUSE]  but [PAUSE].   I actually [EMPHASIS]  found it easier talking to people that I knew who lived at other ends of the county [PAUSE] who were nowhere near it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Are these friends?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Friends [EMPHASIS] yeh.  I know a few who sort of live Dundee area, Perth area, it was ring them, or down at Marlborough and Wiltshire a
nd Bristol.  I found it easier to ring them [EMPHASIS] than to ring people who I go out with every weekend, every second weekend, than speak to them.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So are these people in farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But they have some understanding?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yeh, they\rquote ve lived among farming but they don\rquote 
t farm their actual selves.  As I say it was easier to speak to them than it was to speak to people who you went out with because every [EMPHASIS]  night, if you did go out with people regularly, all [EMPHASIS]   it came
 back to was foot and  mouth [PAUSE]  who\rquote d gone down this week and what\rquote s going to happen now, and oh things will never be the same again and, you know, there\rquote 
s no future in it and all the farms are going to go sky high. Living somewhere else, completely different view on life really.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 What do you think of the media coverage?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Crap.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is that national?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 National.  Local media and radio coverage [PAUSE]  very informed, very professional and very correct.  National, really didn\rquote t want to know [PAUSE]  you know, they were after the big headlines [PAUSE]  they weren\rquote 
t concerned.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Were you approached by the national media?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, not in here.  Some of the more senior staff were but not in here.  I don\rquote t think I would have gone and talked if they had.  After that, I\rquote 
ve got no trust of national media or Government at all [EMPHASIS].  This last week being an excellent example.  We are going to have a transport Minister splattered on the front pages, suspected foot and mouth case.  There\rquote 
s been three cases like that in Cumbria in the last four weeks, which the local newspapers have covered and said, nothing to worry about, could be positive antibodies.   That\rquote s never hit National press.  No, I don\rquote 
t think the national media covered it very well at all really.  They were 
showing these pyres, weeks [EMPHASIS]  after the last pyre had gone out [PAUSE]  and it went beyond [EMPHASIS]   that when they brought Brigadier in, it went beyond that.  I often sit back and say, what did he do.  She [C his wife]  says Brigadier came an
d took the pain away, she says he tidied everything up and he took the pain away, and yet even four, five weeks after he was here, they\rquote re still [EMPHASIS]   showing the pyres, because the pyre was the image wasn\rquote t it.  It\rquote 
s like September the 11}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235  and the towers, the pyres were the image.  As I say, it was the headline and once that\rquote 
s gone [PAUSE] and everyone forgot about it [PAUSE],  end of June it was the elections on and the media forgot about it.  It was still going on, there was cases right up until the end of August, and then drip drip drip, 30}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{
\f0\insrsid9833235  of September that was it.  But locally I thought it was excellent.  Well locally the papers have won national awards for the coverage of it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Do you think that\rquote s in part because some of the staff have got farming backgrounds?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well perhaps.  I know C covered a lot.  I think that was an outlet for me.  She\rquote d come home and say I\rquote m doing this story, what do you think about it, and we\rquote d sit together and type the story and I\rquote 
d say I want my by-line on the front [LAUGHTER] page as well.  She was working late the night that Nick Brown did the U-turn and at six o\rquote 
clock the pages were all set that Thursday night to go with this headline, and then the U-turn.  She came back at half eleven that night, \'85she was a bit disenchanted wondering whether she\rquote d done the right thing moving to C\'85
 and she came back and says, now I know what journalisms about, she says, we just totally turned it, she says, the editor was standing on my shoulder rattling it out and the whole thing changed.  But I also think there\rquote 
s a knowledge side of it which is good reporting but there is also the readership of the people who know [EMPHASIS & PAUSE]   and if they pick that up and read it and its not right\'85 you know, if someone in Longtown picked the pa
per up and the [local paper] say, had gone with the headline, \lquote H pyre not to go ahead\rquote ,  having all stood there and watch it being lit [PAUSE], they would throw it out and they would probably never again have a circulation In Longtown.  It
\rquote s like Radio Cumbria [PAUSE]     if they don\rquote t tell people the truth [PAUSE]  the listeners just turn off and they never come back.  Whereas the Nationals, the Cumbrians, it\rquote s a dot isn\rquote 
t it, not many people live in Cumbria.  They sell like a million newspapers in London so they\rquote 
re not bothered [PAUSE].  My parents were at a wedding , summer of last year, and there was a gentleman and he was up from Essex, and he was at the bar as it was, and Thomas my dads friend, and they were talking and this guy turned round and said, you
\rquote ve had foot and mouth and you\rquote re from Cumbria, and me Dad says yes. He took his drink and said, can I come and sit down with you for half an hour or so and tell me what it\rquote 
s all about because he says we hear nothing of it down with us.  And that was Essex, where the first case was.  Case number one was in Essex.  Me Dad says he was so interested he wanted to know [EMPHASIS].
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I\rquote m aware that time is moving on, but can you just say what was the worst bit about foot and mouth for you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 The worst [EMPHASIS] bit [PAUSE], the worst bit absolutely, personally, being selfish, was when we got called into here and they said right [PAUSE],  going half time, we don\rquote t know where we\rquote 
re going from here.  I know that\rquote s selfish but all sorts of things flash before you, like thinking am I going to have a job.  You know, it happens everyday, everywhere doesn\rquote t it, people get made redundant.  That one instance you thought it
\rquote s going to be quite big.  A more personal level really I think, it was}{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 when we went down really.  As I say we went down [culled] on the 14}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235 , on the 10}{
\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235  sorry, they lost the sheep, on the 24}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 th}{\f0\insrsid9833235  they lost the cattle and then on the 23}{\f0\super\insrsid9833235 rd}{\f0\insrsid9833235 
 of May we lost my Grandma and it all just sort of bang bang bang.  That six weeks was just absolutely\'85  Cos we were into lent and I\rquote d given up chocolate [CHUCKLES]   and it got to the point and I went home and said bollocks to it, sod it.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Was you\rquote re Grandmother\rquote s death expected?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No it wasn\rquote t really.  No it wasn\rquote t expected.  It took a fortnight to get over the sheep going, three weeks to get over the cattle going and then it was just a roll on.  You know, April, May and June weren\rquote 
t good months at all.          
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Was there anything good that came out of it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 We\rquote ve had a lot of jokes out of it because it got to a point where you had to walk out of here.  I\rquote d open that door and walk out of here and all you\rquote d see would be\'85 I can\rquote t work in that, I can\rquote 
t  be done with seeing people like that and [PAUSE],  I think there was actually a real sort of [PAUSE]  you know, at the end there was a real sort of comraderie about it.  We were all\'85 [PAUSE],  you know, you\rquote d come in and you\rquote 
d walk around the office and you\rquote d maybe swear and you\rquote d be like oops I shouldn\rquote t do that round the office and then the boss would walk in, and he\rquote d just had the same problem you\rquote d had and he\rquote 
d walk in and swear right in front of the office [LAUGHTER], and it\rquote s moments like that which are just absolute gems.  I couldn\rquote t say to you that there\rquote s one moment in that year where I think, you know, I\rquote 
ll always remember that.  I don\rquote t think there were any great moments for anyone.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Finally, how do you see the future of farming in Cumbria?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Knackered.   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 That\rquote s what you personally feel?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, knackered [PAUSE].  Not a very nice word that is it [LAUGHTER].
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I know where you\rquote re coming from.  }{\f0\insrsid9833235  
\par 
\par  No, Cumbria, it\rquote s a livestock breeding ground.  If you\rquote ve got a factory you\rquote ve got production, Cumbria\rquote s your production, that\rquote s where the stock in the country comes from.  Cumbria, South West Scotland.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Are you talking particularly about pedigree stock?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I\rquote m talking about all stock [PAUSE].  Farmers were struggling before this [PAUSE], they\rquote d turned the corner after BSE, things had got past the bottom out, started to pick up, and now [EMPHASIS]  they [PAUSE]  they
\rquote re trying to get back again.  There\rquote s not as many farmers are going to go back in [PAUSE].  I don\rquote t think foot and mouth can be blamed for it, it\rquote s a worldwide thing, that\rquote s what a lot of farmers have to recogni
se.  Trade now is worldwide, it\rquote s not just Cumbria and England, it\rquote 
s a global market.  I think unless farmers in Cumbria really increase in size [PAUSE]  right across the board [PAUSE], which, the majority of farmers in Cumbria are unable to do [PAUSE], then the future for farming, well it\rquote 
s dire.  We see it in here; the young kids aren\rquote t coming on [PAUSE].  You know, we farm, my brother and I aren\rquote t coming on, five years of your farm on the market.  You can walk out in to the rings [at the auction mart] to
day and it will all [EMPHASIS]   be over fifty year olds, the young people aren\rquote t coming on.   If those people aren\rquote t following through, then in ten, fifteen, twenty years there\rquote s going to be no one there and I don\rquote 
t think the infrastructure in farming can support it.  There\rquote s a lot of money swilling out there at the moment.  I\rquote m not getting away from that, there\rquote 
s a lot [EMPHASIS]  of money circling in the farming community at the moment, but beyond that I really don\rquote t think farming will ever take off again.  I think it\rquote s going to contract now.  We\rquote 
ve seen it in 67, you know, foot and mouth was concentrated in the Cheshire area, you know, the Crewe area, and when they recovered, it came back a wealthy area, farming dairy herds the likes there.  But I say, we\rquote 
re in different times now, you know, food didn\rquote t travel out of the country then.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 You said something interesting.  You said you feel farming can\rquote t [emphasis] increase, is that partly geography?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yeh, you know, if you look at Cumbria, we\rquote ve got what, 75 percent of it\rquote s Lake District.  We\rquote re talking fells here [SENTENCE EMPHASISED];  we\rquote re talking massive planning restrictions.  You can\rquote 
t just decide you want to knock a shed up because you need to take a hundred cattle on to make a profit, you just can\rquote t do
 it.   The Government want those farms, not to farm and the farmer to be paid to look after the hills.  Custodians of the country side [PAUSE]   lovely, yeh [PAUSE].   You know it might work in theory, my father\rquote 
s very of the attitude, he says, well if he wants to pay me to plough a field [PAUSE]  fine.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I think people outside of the county don\rquote t really take in some of those very practical restrictions, like if you had a large site then you can have massive great machinery, that\rquote s actually quite difficult isn\rquote 
t it, in places like the hills farms.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yeh, the hills, you\rquote d be lucky to get a tractor up them [LAUGHTER].}{\b\f0\insrsid9833235  
\par 
\par So shouldn\rquote t we be trying to hang on to hill farming?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Well this is it, I think once you lose them\'85 at the end of it it\rquote s like every business, it comes down to the bottom line, the economics have to be there, and we\rquote ve seen it since we\rquote 
ve opened here, we were putting most of our prime stock direct to the abattoirs [PAUSE].  Farmers don\rquote t like it because the abattoirs pay a    lesser price that way, whereas when it\rquote 
s in a public market place, then we have competition and you get the correct market value. Now we\rquote ve opened our public market place and the buyers prime stock just aren\rquote t coming, so they\rquote ve said right, we\rquote re 
[EMPHASIS] not coming.  So that\rquote s where the price is going to be, as I say, it\rquote s going to be a dead weight [PAUSE] and the market price is forcing that, you can\rquote t do anything about it.  It\rquote 
s like if a restaurant is too dear you just don\rquote t go.  Your hands a
re tied, so we as a business have got to try and encourage farmers to go that route and try and work with them.  But economically farmers they wont be making a lot of money out of it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So do you think there has got to be a more responsible consumer response as well?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Consumers could help [EMPHASIS & PAUSE], but again it\rquote s bottom line.  If you\rquote ve got two roasts of beef on a shelf and one of them is \'a32 and one of them is \'a35.50 and it\rquote 
s organically produced on a Cumbrian fell, you\rquote re not going to buy.  The majority of people, I don\rquote t think they would. Anyway that\rquote s my feeling about it.
\par   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 But I suppose the idea is if you increase the market.  This idea of actually getting back to, for example, the abattoirs.  I mean how many abattoirs were around in 67; how far [emphasis] do livestock travel to be slaughtered.
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par You\rquote re right.  It was an ideal exit.  All this travel that they see in this country, it all brings focus back to the auction marts [PAUSE].  We have been seen throughout as being the bad guys amongst this and we\rquote 
re like an estate agent really, we\rquote re trying to get the best price for the vendor than we can, we\rquote re an agent , we\rquote re a broker.  Now with the abattoirs, fair enough, the stock has to travel and I don\rquote 
t agree with animal cruelty what so ever, I would never condone animal cruelty, but some of the wagons that come into here take stock away whether they\rquote 
re going fifty miles or five hundred miles, are better [EMPHASIS]   kitted out than some of the buses that we\rquote ll take to go to a pop concert or a footb
all match [PAUSE].   If we had a bus up to the same standard, you would quite happily travel a thousand miles [PAUSE].  Now the nearest abattoirs to us now, here are Lockerbie and Newcastle really [PAUSE], Whitley bay.  So you\rquote 
re talking eighty mile at tops [EMPHASIS] to get to Whitley bay.  That [EMPHASIS]   is perceived in some circles as being too far [PAUSE].  I question it; I think well it\rquote s not a distance at all. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Particularly when you\rquote re bringing stock in from somewhere say like Belgium. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235  Exactly.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 And they all have to come in through Dover now don\rquote t they?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 So they\rquote ve got to travel four hundred mile north before they even get up here.  All these French cattle that the farms are buying are pedigree stock, here\rquote s an example, it\rquote s having to go d
own [EMPHASIS],    across and then back up.  You\rquote re talking nearly a thousand miles. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is there also about a nine-hour restriction?  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, there\rquote s only a particular journey time.
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So if you have to come up from Dover it\rquote s almost like you\rquote re penalised if\'85  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, you might have to stop at south Cumbria, because you\rquote re up to your nine hours you can\rquote t go any further [EMPHASIS].  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 There are quite a lot of anomalies aren\rquote t there. 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235   There are a lot of anomalies; there are a lot of things, which\'85 there\rquote s a l
ot of finger pointing [PAUSE]  which is unfortunate.  As I say, I think farming, say talk about its future, I think geographically that plays a major role in it, It doesn\rquote 
t allow the expansion that would probably be required on a lot of farms.   Also breeding wise really, as in people, there aren\rquote t the young people coming on, so these farms\'85 I think it\rquote s going to be like an organic growth, a farm won
\rquote t be able to expand until the farmer next door either retires or passes away and then they\rquote ll buy up that.  But that\rquote s going to be a long [EMPHASIS]   process, and come that time by then, I think we\rquote 
ll be out of it [PAUSE]   you know, we\rquote ll be out of it and it will just be a direct between farmers.  I can see us in five years, maybe ten years, we\rquote ll just have an office, smaller than this and there\rquote 
ll be just six or seven of us handling paper. 
\par 
\par   }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I quite like the way you described that, that kind of estate agent handling.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, it will all be direct and we\rquote ll just act as broker for the goods really.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 So are you looking for another job?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I have done and as much as I have enjoyed being open again I think now it\rquote s best just to walk away really. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Sorry to get so personal.  
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No, I sat an Open University degree.  I can\rquote t be bored, I thought right I\rquote ll go and do 
an Open University degree.  I got two years into it and then the board in here asked me if I would like to do my company secretarial exams.  So I thought right, it\rquote s a good opportunity; they\rquote 
re prepared to put me through them, which is a considerable cost that I couldn\rquote t stand.  They\rquote re prepared to put me through it and if I get that then basically the world is open to you because it\rquote 
s an internationally recognised qualification.   But at the same time I still\'85 I can\rquote t see me being here for ever [PAUSE], not for a lot longer.  It\rquote 
s becoming samee.  A lot of people enjoy the paper chase [PAUSE]   some people enjoy it, you know, taking that and putting it there.  No, you\rquote ve got to be creative.  We\rquote re on a project at the moment redesigning the office, completel
y redecorating and redesigning the office, that\rquote s something you can get you\rquote re teeth in to.  I can\rquote t be sitting; I feel I\rquote m starting to stagnate now.   Fourteen years in this same office.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Is there anything you would like to say that I haven\rquote t asked?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 No.   As I say I just look at the general pain and I think it\rquote s one experience that \'85 you know, I\rquote m not even bitter towards the Government, I\rquote m not bitter towards anyone, you know, I don\rquote 
t feel aggrieved.  Everyone will have their own views and people will blame it, oh it\rquote 
s all a set up or whatever.  I just find it really sad that, as I say, if that case this week had been confirmed, we would have been in the same mire probably that we were.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Desperate. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, and the only thing that would have stopped it is that the stock aren\rquote t out there to slaughter out.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 What lessons have we learned?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 I don\rquote t think any.  I said this same conversation to my Mum and Dad about three weeks ago when I saw these farmers restocking, like a train, oh he\rquote s got stock in his fields I\rquote 
ll have to get stock.  You know, it snowballs doesn\rquote t it.  I was sitting one day and I says to my dad, you know, farmers have learned nothing.  Farmers have learned nothing [EMPHASIS]  in the last twelve months.  He\rquote 
s says, no, your right, they\rquote re just trying to carry on as normal.  I says the Government\rquote s learned nothing.  I\rquote ve been over at Defra, I\rquote ve seen
\par all the work that they don\rquote t [EMPHASIS]  learn anything, you know, they don\rquote t write a system [EMPHASIS]   down [PAUSE]  they don\rquote 
t write a system down that works.  I can guarantee you now, if we went back over there tomorrow and there was a sheep cull or a gridded structure, you know blood testing to be done, it would be as big a mire as it was last time.   That\rquote s what I
\rquote ve found most disappointing, no-ones learnt anything.  Well I don\rquote t feel any-ones learned anything.  You know, the headlines when it hit after that suspect this week was just like it was last year, the same headlines [EMPHASIS], foot 
and mouth suspect. 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes, certainly in the National news  wasn\rquote t it.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Yes.  Well, it was.  That was [EMPHASIS] different, they slammed the restrictions on straight, away eight kilometres right around, which didn\rquote t happen before.  But as I say, generally, I don\rquote t think they\rquote 
ve learned anything.  The particular time it happened right through the summer, all the staff were uni and schools out for six weeks, two months or whatever they\rquote re out for.  So they were drifti
ng in, they were drawing fifteen pounds an hour [PAUSE]  and drifting out.  It\rquote s nearly bad on our part as well, because knowing farming, and knowing that you\rquote re going there saying, well this is what you should be doing.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 Frustrating. 
\par 
\par  }{\f0\insrsid9833235 Frustrating yes, but you\rquote ve got twenty walls of bureaucracy to get through and sometimes it\rquote s just right, you\rquote re making decision, this is what we\rquote re doing [PAUSE].. and no as I say I\rquote 
m not bitter about anything, I\rquote m just.. you\rquote ve just got to get on haven\rquote t you.  As I say you can\rquote t dwell, I still LIKE a bottle of wine now and then [CHUCKLES].  I don\rquote t think that\rquote s a problem that\rquote 
s stuck [PAUSE].  There\rquote s  moments, Tuesday night when that foot and mouth hit, I didn\rquote t sleep Tuesday night, that\rquote s why I\rquote ve been so tired this week.  It\rquote 
s been like, oh here we go again.  I think C was worse than I was [PAUSE],   because her parents hadn\rquote t gone, you know, still had their stock, she was worse than I was.  It got to about two o clock and I thought we might as well go upstairs and wat
ch a film; it\rquote s pointless laying in bed.  No it has been an eventful time.  }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235   }{\f0\insrsid9833235        
\par   
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid9833235 I was thanked for his time
\par }{\f0\insrsid9833235 
\par   
\par   
\par }}