{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f138\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f139\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f141\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f142\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f143\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f144\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f145\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f146\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f153\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f156\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\*\cs16 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 header;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext18 footer;}{\*\cs19 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext20 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs21 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden 
footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid353868\rsid1328142\rsid4072867\rsid5061973\rsid8726086\rsid9002273}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6804;}{\info{\operator me}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy7\hr12\min32}
{\printim\yr2002\mo1\dy25\hr15\min36}{\version5}{\edmins6}{\nofpages31}{\nofwords8639}{\nofchars49248}{\nofcharsws57772}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2551\margr1701\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot9002273 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\headerr \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\insrsid1328142 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\fs20\insrsid9002273 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lancaster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}University}{\fs20\insrsid1328142 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par Interview ID:  PM47}{\insrsid1328142 
\par }}{\footerr \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {
\cs19\insrsid1328142 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs19\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid353868 31}}}\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\cs19\insrsid1328142 
\par }\pard \s18\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid1328142 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1328142 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 Date of Interview: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname date}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 1}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}{\xmlattrvalue 17}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 2002}}}17/01/02{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\ul\insrsid1328142 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Date of birth: 1956
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid1328142 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 Occupation: Group 1}{\cs21\super\insrsid1328142 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs21\fs20\super\insrsid1328142 \chftn }{\fs20\insrsid1328142  }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Group 1 }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Group 2 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Group 3 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 .
\par Group 4 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Group 5 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Group 6 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f37\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid1328142 
\par }}}{\insrsid1328142 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b0\f0\insrsid1328142 Geographic region: {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname 
place}}North Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}
\par }{\f0\insrsid1328142 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par How do you think the foot and mouth crisis affected your health and your family\rquote s health?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid1328142 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid1328142 
Well at the start of foot and mouth, last February, I think the first thing that affected my health was actually seeing the pyre burning next to the A69, that first outbreak down Heddon on the Wall.  It really brought home to me.   I was driving past I wa
s
 taking my lad back to university at the time and it made me think for the first time what the hell was going on, because before that it was just news on the TV or on the radio that foot and mouth was around.  It really brought it home to me that it was c
lose and that it might eventually get up our way.  It didn\rquote t affect my health that you know I was feeling sick.   I felt, you just get this sinking feeling, don\rquote t you?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 You must have been worried
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, you just get this sinking feeling.  All this life stock that was burning on this bloody pyre and I had the same livestock at home which I have built up over the years and could it happen to me it was...  
\par 
\par The health of my family, my wife later on, I suppose she was getting down a bit when she saw I was having trouble with DEFRA, it was affecting her.  DEFRA were irritating to me because I couldn\rquote t get through to them, you couldn\rquote 
t get any response from them and any details you had you had to give them 3 or 4 times.  
\par 
\par As for my children, well, my daughter, she is 13 now: she was 12 at the outbreak.   I think she was away at boarding school and she didn\rquote t really didn\rquote 
t know what was going on at the start.  It was only when she got to hear that her friends were affected by it that she kept ringing me up - how are you doing dad, how are the animals doing, have you still got them.  My lad 
who is 18, he was just a student at university and he couldn\rquote t give a damn what was going on, I think.  
\par 
\par The rest of my family, my mum and dad, I think, my mum an
d dad started to listen to Radio Cumbria, believe it or not, which they never listened to before, because that was were all the information was coming from.  My mum, every morning, was making notes on every farm that was affected, every outbreak.  There w
as a list on the table, at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 10}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}10 o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}
, at coffee time when we came in.  I could see it was getting my Mum and Dad down, more than myself because they were listening to it, about it, all day.  They had Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region
}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} on all day and it just seemed to be one disaster after another and I think the more you listened to it the more down you get.  You know and I didn\rquote t tend listen to Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} partly because reception down here is no good.  You couldn\rquote t listen to it.   I had to put my ear to it, to the radio, to hear the outbreaks at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 4}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 55}}}5 to 5{\*\xmlclose} or {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 5}}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 55}}}5 to 6{\*\xmlclose}
 when they were on.  But I could see it was getting my Mum and Dad down.  When you had all these sheep away wintering and it was inevitable that these sheep were going to go eventually and it was just the waiting, the waiting.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 So how did events unfold from you first seeing the pyre at Heddon to your sheep being culled?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 You are right, that pyre was back in February I think and we just kept monitoring the whole situation, just kept listening to the news and watching it and thinking oh it will go away. 
\par 
\par It got worse and on March 24}{\super\insrsid1328142 th}{\insrsid1328142  was our wedding anniversary and we went out, with a few friends, down to an Italian restaurant in Hexham.   And we were with a farmer friend PB, who lives a mile down the road, who i
s a big sheep farmer, and a very well respected farmer, who was a director of Longtown Auction Mart.  And he was at the start.  I didn\rquote t see much of P}{\insrsid8726086 B}{\insrsid1328142  for the month because }{\insrsid8726086 [he]}{
\insrsid1328142  was in the auction mart on the day that those sheep went all over the country.  So P}{\insrsid8726086 B}{\insrsid1328142  came home and he didn\rquote 
t leave his farm and he got to the stage well I can go out now.   It was a Saturday night, March 23}{\super\insrsid1328142 rd }{\insrsid1328142 it was, }{\super\insrsid1328142 .}{\insrsid1328142 24}{\super\insrsid1328142 th}{\insrsid1328142 , I can
\rquote t remember and at lunchtime the next day he got a phone call from his wife to say we have got foot and mouth.  And I thought bloody hell I just got this feeling that I had been out with }{\insrsid8726086 [him]}{\insrsid1328142  the night before, P
}{\insrsid8726086 B}{\insrsid1328142 \rquote s farm is a mile down the road and I thought this is it, we have got it, we will be culled. 
\par 
\par And }{\insrsid8726086 [he]}{\insrsid1328142  came on the phone to
 say that these sheep that had foot and mouth were three mile up this road the Hartside road, up here you have just come down it.  He had a little bit of land up there and he was trying to get the vets to draw the circle of the outbreak from up there rath
e
r than from the farm down here.   Because if they had drawn the circle 3 kilometres from this steading down here it would have taken out our farm and 25 others in Alston Moor.  It would have finished Alston Moor off as livestock farming.  There was two ve
ts on the job and they couldn\rquote 
t agree what to do and in the end they got in get in touch with the chief vet and he decided to draw the 3 kilometres from up the road there and so that meant we were out of the 3 kilometre cull and that made us feel slightly b
etter.  We still thinking it was in the valley and the way it was travelling it was inevitable we would get it.  
\par 
\par As time went it on you felt as if you were going to avoid this.  Because It went down the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Eden{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}Valley{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, it went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}, it went along the Roman wall and it went down Wierdale from Walsingdon down the vale, it was in Teasdale from Middleton down that wa
y.  We thought if we survive this we will do very well.  We had the feeling all the time that maybe we were going to get away with this.
\par 
\par Then, it was in April, towards the end of April, my father and I were up at Blagon which is the hill farm were the sheep are and the sheep pens are and there is house up there.  In fact it is the house that }{\insrsid8726086 K}{\insrsid1328142 
 looked at, we were up there and the guy who lives there he had been down Alston just 100 yards down the road he came in the yard.  We were busy injecting these s
heep for pre-lambing: we were giving them injections to cover clustering diseases and stuff, and he came and says MG down the road with foot and mouth.  And we thought bloody hell, it was just a real sinking feeling.  I thought do we carry on i
njecting these sheep or not.  So we carried on and I thought we looked at all these sheep.  Our best sheep, our young sheep were still at home, the older ones were away wintering you see.  Two hours later he came back and says it isn\rquote 
t foot and mouth it is something else.  
\par 
\par M}{\insrsid8726086 G}{\insrsid1328142 , a local farmer, a neighbouring farmer, he had this sheep that had gone of its feet and it had these blisters in its mouth but these blisters weren\rquote 
t foot and mouth.  It was just caused by the bottom teeth rubbing against the to
p pad but the vet that come out in the first place had said it was foot and mouth.  It made you think, for two or three hours you were in a state of depression and you were thinking and you could see that everything that every else had gone through you we
re about to go through it.  
\par 
\par That was the end of April but the outbreaks in the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceName}}Eden{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}Valley{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - we were kind of monitoring them - where they were happening because we even went and bought the maps of the area.  Are there 6 - which scale are the ordinance survey maps the ones used for fell walking and stuff?
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 
\par {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 1}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 45}}}1:45{\*\xmlclose}.
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par  Whatever they are we brought them.  They had all the farms in the area.   When they were coming though Radio {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 we were plotting all the farms because my mother is from the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Eden{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} valley and sh
e know the Penrith area.  We could plot all these farms where the foot and mouth was going.  There were 3 farms where our sheep where at.  We could see it was getting closer and it was getting closer.  Every time the phone rang you were thinking this is i
t.  
\par 
\par And surely enough one morning, we knew there was an outbreak at this farm, we drew the circle and we thought right that is our sheep in there we had to give them up voluntary and sure enough the next day the local auction mart came on we will have to 
go and value your sheep, fair enough.  We hadn\rquote t seen these sheep since the week before the outbreak.   We dosed them in January and we hadn\rquote 
t seen them since January.  But we kept in contact with the farmers and it was just a question of waiting.  We knew they would have to go, the Ministry had said they would have to cull these sheep or we had to give them voluntary - which we did.  We didn
\rquote t have to but we did.   We were just waiting for the day when they would have to go and it got nearer and nearer to 
lambing time.  Because I just hoped if they were going to cull these sheep they would go before they lambed, because the thought of these ewes giving birth to these lambs one or two days old then off they go.  Because I had heard tales from other farmer o
f what had happened.  They shoot the sheep but also they inject the lambs to kill them.  I though poor little things, if they are going to go let them go before.   But they didn\rquote 
t, they started to lamb did these sheep.  These were the yawls that were away a
nd I think the farmer where they where at was retired, Les I at Penrith.  He was a fellow probably in his 70s and he was looking after these sheep and I was just concerned that it might distress him.  Because normally these sheep come home at the beginnin
g of March and it was now about 10 April - 12 April and the sheep were still there.  They started lambing on about the 7}{\super\insrsid1328142 th}{\insrsid1328142  April.  I think the sheep went on about the 16/17}{\super\insrsid1328142 th}{
\insrsid1328142  April so there were a lot of ewes went with lambs.  Fortunately for me I didn\rquote t see these sheep go on the wagon or the lambs.  I didn\rquote 
t see them being slaughtered but I was concerned about Les the farmer where they were at.   I was concerned for him really, because it must have been distressing for him and his wife.  
\par 
\par The hogs who were
 at Derdare, they were our young sheep.  They actually were valued on the same day as a cow on the farm, it was a big dairy farm, it was one of the cows.  The cowman came in, the dairy lad said there is a cow got foot and mouth.   I think all the sheep we
nt next day, those hogs, so they didn\rquote t have foot and mouth but there was foot and mouth on the farm, in a cow.  
\par 
\par The other batch of sheep - so there were 180 yawls at Les I, they all went at the start of lambing, there were 100 ewes at High Hesketh which is between Penrith and {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Carlisle{\*\xmlclose}
.  We have sent sheep there for 15 years and the farmer he got totally culled with foot and mouth but the sheep didn\rquote t have foot and mouth when they left.  But there has been a tragic accident on the farm regarding my uncle a
 few years behind he had an accident with a shotgun and he was killed and a farmer up the road took on the farm, my uncle D\rquote 
s farm, because he had no family.  He took it on and he had a whole series of tragedies in his life as well and this was just another one.  And you just felt so sorry for these farmers.  
\par 
\par I could accept the loss of my sheep and the compensation that I got for them, which was very fair, but these farmers who were having to watch their stock being culled.  The dairy cows which, you 
know, you become attached to a dairy cow - you see the back end of it twice a day, every day of the year and you do become attached to them.  
\par 
\par But I hadn\rquote t seen my sheep for, middle of January so it is February, March, April, for 3 month.  I hadn\rquote t seen them for 3 months because I didn\rquote 
t dare go up near them.   Every farmer in Alston has sheep wintered away, it is usually the first generation, they go away to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Eden{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 valley usually or to better grass and you do become attached to your sheep, but I don\rquote t t
hink you become attached to sheep like dairy farmers become attached to cows.  And to see dairy farmers with their stock slaughtered, you did feel for them.  You see farmers on television crying and I can imagine that is how they felt.   It was just this 
s
inking feeling for months you had, a bit of depression, and it is the wait.   It was a kind of a bit of relief when the sheep went to slaughter.  And then you had the pictures on television of all these wagons going into Great Orton and I thought if there
 were any of mine on there.    And day after day these healthy sheep - because I am sure that they culled a lot of sheep that they needn\rquote 
t have culled.   Did they kill 3 million sheep, something like that: I reckon 2 million of them were healthy, at least.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It must have caused a lot of anxiety just waiting
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 I was the feeling of waiting and waiting and then when you had them culled, it was lambing time here and normally I would bring them back here to lamb and there was nothing in the fields here.  People wer
e driving through and locals were saying, when you went in the pub, there are no sheep in your fields this year.  And one man who lives in a house on the other side of the valley, I think he must have watched me lamb through binoculars, and he has noticed
 that is no sheep and it is sad not to see sheep at Blackhouse this time and he was quite right, he was quite right.  
\par 
\par And I think I did a thing for John Craven, the Countryfile.  It was on tele last week as well.  He did a programme called four great drives in this country and the drive from Penrith to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1
{\factoidname PlaceName}}Hayden{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bridge{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} has just been voted one of the top ten journeys in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Europe{\*\xmlclose}.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Really?
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par Yes, it is the top o
ne and the local council put him on to me, to talk you know, as a farmer on the side of the road on this A686 and sure enough he came.  It was in May I think and they filmed all these bare fields round here with no livestock on whatsoever.  That is when i
t affects you \endash  when you go out in the morning and you see lambs skipping around in the field and there was none of that this year.   
\par 
\par But I still had me cows to got to.  I still had 40 cows and I still had them to see to and I still had some stock.  I sti
ll had 400 sheep left at home which were on a different part of the farm.  So I still had work to go to, stock to tend and things like that.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 So how many sheep did you loose in the cull?
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par I lost 400; I lost half the flock.  I had 800 sheep and I lost 400 which was wintered away.
\par 
\par As I said before, nearly all the farms at Alston winter the first generation of lambs away for the winter.  So there is a whole generation of sheep missing from Alston because they have all been slaughered.  
\par 
\par It was just depressing at the time.  I am sure I am over it now, I am a pretty laid back person to start with.  I don\rquote 
t get myself bothered about a great deal.  My temperents are on an even keel.   I am not a bad tempered person.  I just kind of accept things.   But it was the back end of the year when you didn\rquote t have your lamb sales and you didn\rquote 
t have any income. 
\par 
\par Because traditionally with hill farmers, with sheep farmers, you have all your income in September, October, November that is when all your sales are and you survi
ve for the rest of the year on your income from three months of the year.  So I had had my income from the previous lamb crop and I was living on that and I just didn\rquote 
t have the sheep.   And come the back end of the year I have no income coming from these sheep, you think bloody hell.
\par 
\par And then you get the banks ringing up - are you alright, have you got your compensation, do you want to do this do that and you think you have to think about you do start to think where your income is coming from.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 The banks were OK, were there?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 The banks were fine.  I think the banks were very good in all this, they were very understanding.  We bank with B they were very good indeed.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Was it a local bank?}{\insrsid1328142 
\par 
\par It was a local branch but the guy that handles agriculture is at Hexh
am.  We dealt with Hexham.  We have a local branch here. The banks were very good, very understanding because I think they could see that most of these farmers were going to restock and they were our customers you know we have got to stand by them in thes
e times.  They gave us special rates on your overdraft and things like that to make sure you didn\rquote t go belly up.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Were you actually there when your sheep were culled?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 I wasn\rquote t present at the farm when they were culled and I think that must be a tremendous 
blow to any farmer that sees this.   Some farmers probably chose to leave and go away.  I think DEFRA recommended that farmers left the farm for a couple of days but P}{\insrsid8726086 B}{\insrsid1328142 
 even though the outbreak was up there.  His farm runs round behind the farm here a
nd other side of the valley and comes down the steading and they culled all his stock, everything.  They culled them on the roadside and a lot of people actually drove past to go and see these sheep lying dead.  I think you do, I think if there is an acci
dent on the motorway you can\rquote t help but look.  It is a natural thing for people to want to see.  I didn\rquote 
t go along to have a look but  I could see them from our farm you could see half a mile across the valley this three acre field covered in a white dust..   }{\insrsid8726086 PB}{\insrsid1328142 
 had cows laid in his farmyard for 10 days before they were removed and the stink must have been dreadful.   
\par 
\par I could see }{\insrsid8726086 [him]}{\insrsid1328142  going downhill because he is a farmer who lives for his sheep and }{\insrsid8726086 [he]}{\insrsid1328142  had this, you see he was a Director of Lo
ngtown Auction Mart and he felt it was inevitable that he was going to get it and he did get it and he was the only farmer in Alston to get it.  It seemed so ironic that he got it.   And you could see him physically going down hill and even now I see him 
- he has restocked with cattle and I know he is not happy because they are not his cattle, they are someone else\rquote 
s, they are not his.  He did manage to save his hogs because, believe or not, he had a farm near Longtown which actually survived foot and mouth
 and he is bringing these sheep home and he is buying some other sheep which he is going to turn over.  He is going to build up his own flock again but I still see a change in }{\insrsid8726086 [him]}{\insrsid1328142 
 and even thought foot and mouth probably got me a bit depressed it didn\rquote 
t really effect my health, I just got a bit depressed for a few months.  And now I think when lambing time comes around again in a couple of months time we think we will feel we are on our way again.   We intend to build up our own flock back up from what
 
we have left not buy stock in.  So it is going to be tight for a few years.   But I think when you start buying stock in you are buying problems.  In breeding your own stock you can control all the health problems, everything .  It what is called a closed
 flock.  When you buy in other people\rquote s sheep,  you don\rquote t know what the hell you are buying in diseases and all sorts.   I will be pleased in a couple of years when I get back to where I am.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Do you think the general public realises the level of attachment that farmers have to their stock?
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par That\rquote s right.  I know quite a lot my sheep individually because you can look at a sheep and think that sheep had a good lamb last year, she has a tup lamb this year, she had a show lamb last year and your rams you know wh
ich ones are getting well in.  You build up these bloodlines over a few years.  You go to other flocks to purchase a ram to keep your quality up and you do get attached to them.   Some more than others, some farmers more than others.  
\par 
\par Some farmers just don\rquote t spend a day away from the farm all their lives and my father was a bit like that.  He just lives to work I think.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Is he is still farming?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, he is still farming.  He is a very active fellow.  He is 66 now and he is a fit man.  He won\rquote t go on the q
uad bike; he walks everywhere.  He reckons he is the last walking shepherd.  I will go round on the quad bike these days so I put on a couple, well I used to play a lot of rugby, I packed it in 7/8 years ago and put on half a stone of weight, so it is not
 so bad.  I ride about on a quad bike.
\par 
\par I have heard tales of farmers having their sheep dogs killed, which was totally wrong because that is the one animal on the farm that you do get attached to.   I have heard tales of odd slaughter teams shooting the fa
rm dogs which was totally out of order because they don\rquote t carry foot and mouth.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 The way the compensation issue was managed how did you think\'85.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 I think the compensation was very fair.  It was all left in the hands of the auction companies and they wanted 
to see their farmer customers looked after.  And at the start when foot and mouth took off you heard of compensation that was pretty low but farmers just accepted it and they took it and, as the disease progressed, the valuations got higher and higher.  I
 have heard of some farmers getting ridiculous amounts of money for some sheep and some bulls, which they needn\rquote 
t have got, I think it was in excess of what they were worth.  That pitted farmer against farmer because farmers in the early days of the outbreak were getting \'a340/50 a ewe and by the time it was half way through they were getting  \'a3
100 a ewe.  I am sure a lot of jealousy among farmers you know, why should he get \'a3100 when I was getting just \'a350.  That was pitting farmer against farmer.   With times of foot and mouth I am sure we did stick together on this.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 That was the impression that I got - that communities did come together.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Oh yes they did come together, but I am sure that some farmers looked at other farmers thinking why did you get so much.  Because there were farmers talking and there were tales going round of who got what, who got the other.  
\par 
\par There were some sheep at Penrith, in fact didn\rquote t get culled.  As you drove from here to Penrith there was one field of sheep.  I am not saying whose they are, I know whose they were, but he was after so much per sheep for that they couldn\rquote 
t agree between farmer and the valuation, they couldn\rquote t agree, and these sheep survived foot and mouth they were still there, they have gone back home.  Ii just s
hows how much stock were needlessly culled.  Because the farmer wanted a thousand pounds a ewe for them, because they were a top flock, they were a top flock.  The Government said we are not giving \'a31000 and he said, \'93
 I am not giving you my sheep then\'94, because he didn\rquote t have to give his sheep up and he kept them.    
\par 
\par There is a lot of farmers, one or two, I know, who have said I wish I had got foot and mouth because the valuations were good.  If they had a farm sale they wouldn\rquote t have got at a farm sale what they received in compensation from the Government.

\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 I was talking to someone who saying that there was a big difference between the annual tax valuation, you have to do for your stock and the foot and mouth valuation -.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Tax valuation, that is a new one.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Don\rquote t you have to send in a tax valuation every year regarding  the value of your stock?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Value of the stock, I see.  You see there are different ways of doing it., you have what is called a herd basis or an actual flock 
valuation.   And it is all to do with tax.   I have my cows and sheep on what is called a herd basis.  So if I go and buy a new cow and calf and it costs \'a31000 for a good one, it comes into the farm and it is valued at \'a3
300.  Every cow on the farm is valued at \'a3
300 and it makes your valuations for tax purposes a lot simpler.  The sheep are the same, every sheep you buy is on your books at a set price so you can work out the value the flock.  When you sell sheep you sell them on quality the better ones might
 make \'a360, the next ones might make \'a350, \'a340, \'a3
30, but when they came to slaughter them every sheep had one price, one price on your flock I think, I think apart from hogs, they had those two valuations, but every age group, every year had the same value w
hether it was a good one or a bad one.  Each ewe in lamb with two lambs or usually a lamb and a half, you know some had singles and some had twins, and you got about \'a3
120 for a ewe that was in lamb for that age and I think the older your dam the less you got  - so I don\rquote t want he meant by tax.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Maybe that was it.  How was the whole compensation process explained by  MAFF?
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par I think that it was explained more to us by the auction companies.  I think the auction companies were onto a good thing because the auction companies they received a certain percentage of whatever stock they valued.  So for every ewe that they valued at 
\'a3100 they got \'a31.  So it was in their interest to put the valuations high.   So you can see why the profits of Penrith farmers this year,
 the profits are up half a million pounds.  Because there was that many valuations that they have received that much income from the valuations.   
\par 
\par You kind of had to rely upon the auction companies putting a value on the stock because they were doing it 
24 hours a day.  They were going from farm, to farm, to farm, to look at stock and value.  Because, at the start, they were just valuing individual animals and as the disease got ahead of them, because DEFRA and MAFF at the time got ahead of them, they we
re just going on the farm and valuing batches because there wasn\rquote t time to look at every cow, every bullock.  They went in and said there were 20 bullocks in there, they are 12 months old, they are \'a3
450, right move on to the next batch.    Whereas in the ea
rly days every beast put in a cow crush to be slaughtered, they had to put a value on it and in the end the disease was that rampant they were just flying round the countryside putting values on batches.  So we just accepted the valuer's word because they
 had seen so many and it was fair, we just accepted, we didn\rquote t quibble any of it.    
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Was it all sorted out quite quickly?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, compensation, probably I think it was about a month after you had your animals slaughtered you received your compensation.   Which wasn\rquote 
t bad.  You heard tales of farmers waiting two or three months to accept it.  I just think there has been too much money wasted on foot and mouth, there has been money thrown at it.  
\par 
\par I have a stepson, who is 25 in September, and he has quit his job.  He has worked in a local factory for about 6 years and he could see all this money being made by lads who were getting \'a3100 a day by spraying cars and he was up at the factory getting 
\'a3200 a week.  He quit his job in November to go and work on foot and mouth clean up.  And he is down in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Cornwall{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, believe it or not.  He was shifting sheepskins out of a factory.  All he was doing was pointing put that in there.  He is getting \'a310 a hour and I can\rquote t blame the lad for doing it.  OK it might be all over.  He rang last night, he had been in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname City}}Gloucester{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 he is driving back to Newquay.  He is putting 22 hours a day in - why not make the money when it is there.  But, to my mind, why they are taking lads down to Cornwall to work when I am sure there are plenty of lads in Cornwall that would work for \'a3
10 a hour, it is crackers to my mind.   But the money thrown at foot and mouth is horrendous.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 There have been so many stories of how it all started, I don\rquote t know what you think about some of those.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, every 
farmer thinks that the whole think is a bloody conspiracy to get rid of a lot of sheep in this country, which they have done, they have got rid of 3 million sheep.  I think  there is probably about probably 30 million sheep in this country - there are 3 m
illion gone.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Do you think there is a lot of strong feeling about that in the farming community?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes a lot of anger.  I think there has been a lot of anger that there has not been a public inquiry.  Northumbria are having theirs at the moment, I think Cumb
ria might be having one, Devon has had one, but as all this money been wasted why not have an inquiry to see how it happened, let it not happen again.  The lives it has affected in the North of England, you know Lancashire and Cheshire, Cumbria   Northumb
erland and Durham from the farmers to the hoteliers, country shop, the  post offices, everyone.  It has affected so many people and the tales you hear, you just want to know the truth.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Yes, it must be really frustrating.
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par You know, from the railway sleepers that were ordered months ago.  My Dad was talking to his brother-in-law the other day, he had gone to buy some straw from somewhere in the north-east last September and they said we can\rquote 
t sell it because the Ministry had
 bought it.  And this was a year gone September, 5 months before it happened.   He said I have sold this straw to the Ministry.  Now, why the hell did they want straw?   And faxes coming to the wood yards at Askham in November to have stockpiled timber an
d there was a factory at Haltwhistle they make plastic containers, don\rquote t they, and he got a message to put all his men on overtime to make containers for disinfectant and this was a year gone September/October, the year 2000.  Because R
B here, he is friendly with them he said my men have been told to make all these containers for disinfectant, why?   What is going to happen?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It must be so frustrating?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, to not know the truth and then the Government to say it is it is all under control, when it wasn\rquote t under control. If this had had been happening in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname 
country-region}}Kent{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} or {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Surrey{\*\xmlclose} they would have jumped on it.  As it is we are a bit of an outpost up here and this is were the sheep are at, quite a few sheep up here.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Where did you get the most support from during foot and mouth\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
Most support, I reckon the best thing was talking to other farmers, hearing their tales, what had been going on, getting all the craic.  You got people like ?, benevolent fund,  getting in touch with you, they were offering you help - phone ca
lls, helplines.  He even got an approach from the local church, support there.   Obviously the banks were helping you financially - support that way.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 One of the things that I think is interesting, was that rather than go to formal support networks such as Farm Crisis or local health professionals, people have talked to their mates and family, do you think that is the case or not?

\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 It is here, I think farmers tend to stick together in pubs.  I have a group of friends that aren\rquote t farmers that I socialise with as well.  But you hear other people\rquote s tales and other people\rquote 
s worries and you think maybe I am not so bad off after all.  Because I wasn\rquote t actually present when my livestock was culled I think that it did not affect me as great deal as if you had them a
ctually slaughtered.   To my mind, that must have been horrendous.   Especially, you can have a sick sheep or a sick cow being shot, being put down and that is part of life but all these healthy animals going away to slaughter to my mind  that was the wor
se time to me, seeing all this livestock, seeing other people in distress.
\par 
\par Obviously the television got on to all this.   Channel 4 was good on foot and mouth.  Channel 4 covered the whole thing very good.  There was a programme, I think I mentioned it in 
my diary, on between Christmas and New Year.  There was farm in Devon it was just this half hour programme and the first quarter of an hour it showed you what happened when he lost his stock and his family, etc and then it showed you him re-stocking and h
ow this chap had picked up and how he has come to terms with it he is restocking and he is quite happy.
\par 
\par We were warned in the early day by the NFU that looking at the physiological profiles of farmers through foot and mouth how things were just starting to
 pick up in February in sheep farming, prices were starting to rise because we had had three or four horrendous years.  My income was about 8 grand a year and it was crackers.  You had all these sheep and lambs and all this capital and you were trying to 
m
ake yourself a living and you come out with 8/9 grand a year, it was crazy.  And sheep prices were just starting to pick up and then the outbreak came and apparently they did these profiles.  And sheep farmers, started to dip and then they had their sheep
 
slaughtered, then they thought what do we do now.  And then it kind of levelled out and then they think we will start to re-stock again and it picked up again then they got to restocking in about October then they thought there are all these restrictions 
what are we going to do with all this stock.  We can\rquote t sell them, we can\rquote t shift them we have restocked and they started to dip again and I don\rquote t know what state they are now.   
\par 
\par Because what farmers are sick of, and every farmers I talk to is, is all thro
ugh foot and mouth you never heard anything else about any other disease BSE CJD nothing.  Just as foot and mouth turns up there comes another scare, you know, connecting sheep brains and BSE.   Then just last week on the news they were talking about BSE 
i
n sheep.  That week Longtown Auction mart, which was starting to taking collection in for fat lambs, the fat lambs were a good trade, because all the sheep had been culled, took no fat lambs, no market  for them.  You think another kick in the teeth.  Far
mers seem to be getting kicked in the teeth for years now.    The Government seems to be hell bent on bringing down the farmer, I don\rquote t know why,  I honestly don\rquote t  know why.   
\par 
\par We took a gamble with some sheep,  the sheep we still had at home they didn\rquote t get foot and mouth they have gone back to the farms that were culled last year.  They have gone back there for the winter.  
\par 
\par But we have some what is called wethers which we normally sell in October, these are castrated males, do you understand the farmin
g term.  We sell them off the hill in September/October and the lowland farmer buys them.  He fattens them up on the Eden Valley because he has the good grass, we have all the crap stuff up here, he fattens them up and this year we will take the risk.   W
e will send these sheep away to winter and we will pay \'a3
10 a head to have them wintered and we will fatten them up at our cost hoping to get in the market next month February, February/March all the lambs will be fat.  With all these sheep being slaughtered
 there is a shortage of lambs in this part of the world, there is.  So we thought these lambs \'85 and they were picking up.  Last year they were about \'a31.35 a kilo and in January they were \'a3
2 a kilo and we thought alright, things are good and then you hear t
his news of BSE in sheep and will joe public stop buying lambs.  We have spent all this money to winter these sheep and are they going to be worth anything next month.  You think, I took the gamble, it is going to work, bloody hell, can we sell these shee
p in February.  We will  have to sell them probably by the end of March because if you don\rquote 
t sell them by the time they are a year old, with all these BSE regulations, they become adult sheep and they have to have their spinal cords removed.  That is an extra \'a38 per lamb to do it and you lose anything you have made on them.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 How do you manage this all the time?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 I don\rquote 
t know.  I think we are so used to it because we are never used to a set price for our livestock.  You know farmers we trade on the open market.  You go to the auction mart and have a real good day because trade is up and then you have a real shitty day w
hen trade is down.  We live with this. Most commodities are sold at a fixed price, the price is agreed before anything goes.  Farming isn\rquote 
t like that, it is the livestock market, it is an open free market , you see.  And we get used to ups and down with the
 weather. And lamming time it might be bloody awful and we loose lots of lambs.   I think we are used to the up and downs.  But I can see things haven\rquote 
t been good for 3 or 4 years and things were picking up and just this kick  in the teeth this last 2 or 3
 weeks.  I hope it will be forgotten in two or three weeks time and we will start getting rid of or lambs.  We will have to otherwise we will be stuck with them and we will be left with nothing, we will have lost money.
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 
\par You can image people who were culled out as well, coming to time of year they must think\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 That it right.  I think what it is is farmers are born and bred and I am sure it went through my mind during foot and mouth if I get foot and mouth I am going to pack it in what the bloody hell for be
cause I can turn myself to something else, I am sure I can.  But a lot of farmers are steeped in farming and they think of nothing else.  And now they can\rquote 
t really get restocked but I am sure it went through their head you know should I go back into farmin
g, is it worth all this 7 days a week for what I am making.  And I dare say if I had got foot and mouth early on I would have though well because half the farm is tenanted I would give it up and my father, he is retiring  age, he has got his pension and h
e would pack up as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Do you think you would have done that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 When push comes to show, I don\rquote t know, you think you will.   I have friends who have got jobs and what they are making I would be laughing with what they are making  quite easy.   I know my wife 
she sometimes says why are you doing this, what the hell are you doing this for - because I enjoy doing it, I enjoy going out to work, I don\rquote t get up and think bloody hell I have to go to work   I do enjoy going out to work, I have plenty of fre
sh air,  it is a healthy living.  I have health problems with a bad back, I say it is work my Father says it is rugby, I think when push comes to shove it is very difficult isn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It is a question I have asked a few people, it must be such  a difficult question to answer.  
\par 
\par What\rquote s your opinion of what was the worse thing to come out of foot and mouth?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 The worse thing to come out of foot and mouth? 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 The worse part about the whole crisis.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 The worse part for me was starting in September.  We accepted the loss of the stock but then we had stock here and there were all these movement restriction come in and trying to deal with DEFRA and to my mind the frustration it was \'85
  
\par 
\par For example we had 120 ewes on 180 acres of ground we had 3 miles from here and i
t came within, believe or not, it is in Northumberland even though it is only 3 miles from here, it is Northumberland and there was an outbreak at Allendale and they drew what they call the Northumberland blue box, you have probably heard of the blue box.
  Now the fell ground where the sheep where on were inside the blue box but the road, a little narrow road no wider than this kitchen, was outside and we couldn\rquote 
t bring these sheep over this strip of land this way to the good grass.  And it was in August wh
en the blue box came in and we wanted to take the lambs off their mothers, last  years lambs, because these ewes survived and they had a lamb crop and we couldn\rquote 
t wean the lambs   We wanted to take the lambs from there to here, across the road.  Sorry you can\rquote 
t do it - why the hell not?  Because this blue box existed and in the end we had phone call after phone call and, in the end, I said unless you give me permission to shift these sheep - I don\rquote 
t give a damn what you think -  I am going to shift them bec
ause these ewes are suffering.  It was into November I said I wanted to put these sheep back to the ram in 7 days time and they still had their lambs with them, last years lambs, I want to wean them.   I said if you don\rquote 
t come out in the next couple of day
s I am going to shift them and sure enough within a day a vet arrived and he was very sympathetic.  He said  I can see your problem, yes we will let you shift them but it was still 2 weeks before DEFRA came, because I had to get a vet out to see this shee
p, I had to bring out field officers to wash the road and they came from Long Benton in Newcastle in a big van, one brush and a knapsack spray to wash the road..   We had to get water, we had to wash the road and these people are getting \'a3
100 a day for doing this and we get no income, it made you angry.  Eventually we got these sheep shifted.  We had some cows that were in the blue  box  as well and we couldn\rquote 
t get them shifted.  To my mind, dealing with people at the end of a telephone line who couldn\rquote t really picture your situation, who were in jobs who couldn\rquote t understand methods of farming.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 That must be so frustrating - this was calling the  DEFRA hotline?
\par 
\par Side 2
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 \'85all day,  filling in licences.  Even the vets here were sympathetic because they could se
e what was going on.   They could see all these cattle on the hill and come November they want be inside.    We had cattle you know 400/500 feet above sea level, they want to be in the shed, calves with them.   And just dealing with people on telephones a
nd getting angry.  You felt as though you had to threaten them before you could get anything done.  I said if you don\rquote t come to see them I am moving them   
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Was it the local vet who came out?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, the local vet, he wasn\rquote t employed by the Ministry.  Because once you were employed by the Ministry he was very strict about what he would do.  Because he could have gone and worked for foot and mouth but he wouldn\rquote 
t be able to deal with his domestic animals and other farms because he couldn\rquote 
t got to farms that had foot and mouth.  So we had a local vet, there were two of them a husband and wife in partnership and he was very sympathetic but even though they were making calls to the Ministry what they said had no effect.  There we
re people in high places who were making decision on people\rquote s lives.  If they would just come out to see the situation they would say oh yes move them.  Because it was just a matter of moving them 30 years.  You couldn\rquote 
t move a beast 30 metres without a licence across a road and the maximum you could go on the road was 50 metres I think otherwise you had to put them in a wagon and dealing with DEFRA got people wound up.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 So how much time did it take to get through on the phone and to\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Days, you would try a
nd you would try and eventually you got through.  Phillip Bolton the guy who got foot and mouth down the road, his wife had some friends whose son got a job in the licensing department.  I think he was 17 and he was making decisions on farmers where  to m
ove stock and he wasn\rquote t from a farming background.  To my mind that was shocking    It should have been farmers\rquote  wives in call centres who understand the problems if there husband were working and wives could see what were going on.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 I can see your point.}{\insrsid1328142  
\par 
\par It was the frustrations.  Because we though okay if they stopped culling in March, in April sorry, by August everything will be alright, we will be back.  But it seemed to drag on and on and even now,  I have a licence to move stock round the farm we have
 3 farms - 1, 2, 3 and I can move them without having a licence.   I have what is called a sole occupancy licence.  But if I want to take sheep from here say to Longtown the vet to come and see them, sign a licence.  I have to go to Penrith and have the t
railer disinfected and have a seal put on it, pay \'a315 for that, and when you have finished that you have to go to the auction mart, unload your sheep and then you have to disinfect again.  It is just cost, on cost, on cost.          
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Do you get any compensation for that?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
No.   To my mind that was the worse thing was dealing with DEFRA   personally because  up to then everything foot mouth had been dealt with through Auction companies and through letters.   But if you I want to speak to a person, that is wh
at frustrates me know if I ring and  - press 1 for this, press 2 for this to my mind, you do all these numbers then eventually you get through the lines are busy at the moment, ring back later and I had just spend 10 minutes.  It was getting to be the sam
e with DEFRA it really was
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Can you think anything good or anything positive that might come out of the whole situation?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 No at the moment I can\rquote t, anything positive to come out of the situation?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 People have mentioned things like the way the community pulled together.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
Yes, they did because we are in a valley in Alston which, apart from that one outbreak, there was no gathering in the fells in the hills  to see stock slaughtered,  t was just farmers talking together and I think, probably the good thing to c
ome out of it was the transportation of, the movement of sheep round this country has got to change.  I think the good thing that come out of it was to get  people to appreciate what farmers role is in the countryside, especially the Lakes.  If the Lakes 
g
ot wiped out, it would change the whole place.  People go to the Lakes because they like to see what it is, the green valley bottoms and the brown hills and when there is no sheep on these hills it will soon change.  The public were on the farmers side.  
 
I have one or two friends who said you got  all this compensation during that - you just got a true value of your stock.  A mate of mine, his wife has a tea shop in the town, and he said his wife got no compensation for the tea shop and he said you farmer
s
 get all this and you farmers get all that, but I have some compensation but I have no income from the sheep, apart from the little few I have left.  I have  no income off those 400 for the next 3 years.  I have to survive on my compensation for 3 years, 
hopefully it will last.
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 
\par Do you think it will?
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par I don\rquote t know.  If I can sell these sheep that I have got left next month at home I will be alright but if I can\rquote t, you know!
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Foot and mouth continues doesn\rquote t it, the impact.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 The public think f
oot and mouth is over because on the news we are foot and mouth free.  But there are still so many restriction to moving livestock.   The footpaths are just opening now, but as farmers we are under so many restrictions, bio security restrictions, and it h
asn\rquote t gone away for farmers because farmers are still restocking and a lot of farms haven\rquote t got stock back, there are some farms still cleaning up .  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It must be an arduous business.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 It is yes but the craic amongst farmers is still foot and mouth.  You can\rquote t leave a conversation without foot and mouth being mentioned somewhere.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Even now?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Even now.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Was your social life affected very much?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes at the start you didn\rquote t tend to go very far.  I have a daughter away at school and I was very wary of where I we
nt  because I took her back to school one night and there was a scare at Barbon, that one near Lancaster, near  Kirby Lonsdale and it was between Sedbergh and Kirby Lonsdale and Castletown which was where the school was at.   And there was an outbreak the
re and you drove down to school in September I would think she went back, no it was in October, there was a scare then.  I drove through two disinfectant point\rquote s stations on the way down and they didn\rquote 
t wash me.  I came back  through one because the outbrea
k was here and I drove through that one past the outbreak and I could see all the wagons the men in white suits and they just waved me though the next one they they waved me through the next one and this one I had to  go back and say you have to wash me b
ecause I am going back to a farm and sure enough they gave me a good washing and but I was very wary if I went anywhere I made sure  that I washed and disinfected when I came back.
\par 
\par   But there was no social events going one social event was the  Alston sho
w the sheep dog trials where farmers gathered socially nothing was happening.  In a hundred  years of sheep dog trials and shows they had never been missed before, these events weren\rquote t happening.  Farmers weren\rquote 
t gathering were they because there was a fear of taking the disease back to the farm.  In Alston, even though we didn\rquote t have shows and sheep dog trials, farmers still met socially in pubs.  Because the auction marts were closed, they didn\rquote 
t have the auction marts to go to, they didn\rquote t have any of the shows to go to or other farming organised events so really the only points of contact  were the pub and that is how we got together and had a chat..
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It must have been quite a useful way...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 It was yes,  obviously  farmers meet on the roadside when they were passing and you would see two farmers blabbing away. That was the only way that farmers got to talk was meeting on the roadside and the pub.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Some people have said that coming out for the first time after foot and mouth was like coming out after bombing...
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 In this area it wasn\rquote t really like that apart from Phillip.  Phillip didn\rquote 
t leave the farm for two months for the fear of spreading foot and mouth.  I dare say other farmers would have been exactly the same in this valley if the steading had foot an
d mouth.  As it was most farmers that were affected had sheep away wintering so they just didn\rquote t go.  Some people didn\rquote 
t even go shopping to Penrith - I am not going to Penrith.  It was the fear of bringing foot and mouth back to the valley and you had to be very careful and watch where you went and just made sure that you were washed, your vehicles were washed.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 What did you think about the whole disinfectant process?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Well, to my mind, there was an outbreak in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Scotland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in the early day  in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Dumfries
{\*\xmlclose} and {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Galloway{\*\xmlclose} and they had fantastic road baths this deep and everyone had to go through and in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} there was nowt.  I am sure that is one of the reasons that they cleared foot and mouth in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Dumfries{\*\xmlclose} and {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Galloway{\*\xmlclose}
 so quickly because every vehicle was disinfected  thoroughly.  In {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Cumbria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 it was just like a token they had a mat on the road for a while.  I must admit there was a guy in Alston who did an extremely good job.  The NFU got together in Alston back in February - we went on all  the roads and we put straw
 down and sawdust and the farmers, at their own cost, went and disinfected.   I think the County Council got wind of this and in the end they felt they had to do something.  So in the end they come and put the mats down.  And there was one guy in  Alston 
w
ho was a farmer, just part time, he worked for the Council.  He travelled 700 miles a week disinfecting mats in Alston and I thought he did a very god job and it is probably one of the reasons they kept foot and mouth out of Alston.  They should have had 
those fancy wash stations up early on, either the automatic ones or the manned ones where  every car was washed.   I think they would have wiped it out earlier on because I think it must be vehicles that spread foot and mouth.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 People have talked about the effects of disinfectant, for example getting into water supplies, have you heard these stories?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 We I haven\rquote t hears heard these stories - well maybe rot cars in years to come because if you had a mat at your gate and you were over it 4/5 times a day.  Beca
use my wife she is an hairdresser and she goes out and the car was getting washed all the time.  She was seeing a lot of old people.  And a lot of old people were getting a bit worried about foot and mouth.  She came home with tales of Mrs such and such h
as seen something on the news today, she feels sorry for all the farmers.  So  it wasn\rquote t just the farmers \endash 
 people she came in contact with the question was how are you doing with foot and mouth and she was a bit wary even though she was just hairdressing within 3 or 4 miles down the road here.  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Did you ever get the sense that things were out of control, that there was nothing you could do about it?}{\insrsid1328142 
\par 
\par Yes, DEFRA, I don\rquote t know, I don\rquote t know.   It was just sheer frustration - they hadn\rquote t a clue.  It was totally beyond them from the word go.  I think it was only when the army got involved that things became under control.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Do you think so?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Definitely, DEFRA hadn\rquote t have a clue to start to.   Everything was made to sound good.  The day Tony Blair came to Carlisle for his one and only visit to Cumbria, well he made two, the first one visit  in early May there wasn
\rquote t an outbreak in Cumbria that day.  Now I am sure that the figures were fixed for  that one day.  There was an election coming up he wanted to be seen to be doing something. And it was MAFF at the time they went and changed the name didn\rquote 
t they - it was the same damn thing with the same deadwood inside it because they changed their name it wasn\rquote t any different.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 How do you feel now about the future?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 The 
future.  If you had asked my a this 2 weeks ago I would have thought yes things are looking pretty good, sheep prices have picked up, there was a demand for lamb, people were still eating beef and lamb, sales had gone up.  Even with all the scares we had 
people were still eating quite a lot of it beef ,lamb, chicken, pork.   People were still eating quite a lot of it.  But I have a feeling that we are going to get another scare of some sort fairly soon \endash 
 whether it be BSE or foot or mouth, you hear all tales..  
\par 
\par My son Peter, who is down in Cornwall, he said be alert in February   We have had craic down here that foot and mouth is going to start again in February and whether people just scaremongering I don\rquote 
t know, or whether there is truth in it, but I am still not convinced we have a rosy future in farming, I am still not.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 These rumours must wear you down?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 They do wear you down, if I could get my income  back to were I was 3/4 years ago I would be quite happy.  
\par 
\par My son Richard who is 19 and he is not interested in farming and my dad is retiring age I think myself after all this work at home and if things aren\rquote 
t picking up.   I am 45, what would I do and I am sure I could do something else.  Do I look at other animals, do I look at going organic, see if there is better premium and the news in the papers on organic sales is that they aren\rquote 
t what they used to be.  You think to yourself what do I do, do I go back to the way I used to farm or do I look at other methods because if farmers are going to get knock
ed back week after week with health scares.  The future at the moment I am not too confident.   2/3 weeks ago things were looking up because there was a hell of a demand for sheep, you herd tales you know, abattoirs ringing up for lambs.   If you had a de
m
and for lambs that is great, I have a few and trade was good, things were look good and then a week ago this happens and I felt this is going on and on and on because before foot and mouth it was BSE and there were all these tales and the government were 
drawing models, weren\rquote 
t they, they had these virtual models.  Is that what they call them?.   Where if somebody gets it, somebody else gets it, the epidemic will rise so that in 5 years time there will be  32,000 cases of CJD.  Well in fact, up to now with 
a of 10,000 there has been 80 cases but pseudo science is that what it is called?
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 A projection based on existing information\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Yes, they will generate a model and I still think that is the way the government are doing all their plans and projects, everyone is covering their backs.  We must have a licence to do this in case there is an outbreak and it isn\rquote 
t our fault, it is the farmer\rquote 
s fault.  I think in the start when all this licensing came in it was getting to   November and you could move livestock off the farm to three different destination and we had sheep went up to the 3 farms they were on last year they have gone back.  So
 once those sheep have gone off you can\rquote t bring anything on the farm for 21 days because that is the incubation period of foot and mouth.  All these sheep were going away but all these tups come back onto farms from other farms and they couldn
\rquote t do it and 
I know for a fact that there was illegal movement of sheep, just all these tups coming back, from here, there and everywhere.  If the government, or if  DEFRA, had said OK we are going to let you do it and licence it and know exactly were it has come from
 
and if anything happens they would be able to see where the sheep are moved.  As it is there is a lot of underground movements gone on, illegal movements and if it happens DEFRA won't have a bloody clue what has happened or where it has come from.   So DE
FRA are fools in the first place not to let you move sheep even though because there is a 21 day ruling that was one thing that was kept on that farmers are absolutely furious about  because who are dealing with livestock they want to move sheep.   

\par 
\par Say I 
wanted to sell my lambs in February I could sell them to an abattoir no problem.  I could get a licence and I could sell them but say in February March my cows are calving again, I have a cow with a dead calf, I cannot go and buy a calf to adopt on to thi
s cow because I have sent sheep off.  So if I have calving problems I am stuck with one or two dead calves.  I will have no income off the dead calves and that could mean by the time I sell them, if they are bull calves could mean \'a3
1000 for the sake of a  21 day ruling and I need every bit of income I can, but it is DEFRA that is stopping all this.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 And these restrictions didn\rquote t operate before
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 No it didn\rquote t operate before and I think Ok there were sheep moving. A lot of movement sheep being sold in Hexham or
 going to Longtown, sold and going down to Devon, a lot of sheep being moved - that has got to stop.  I think people will probably learn to buy locally.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 That has been talked about quite a lot, hasn\rquote t it.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 I read something last night in a farming magazine that was quite interesting, they fly in mange-tout from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}Africa{\*\xmlclose}
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 
\par It\rquote s {\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns1{\factoidname country-region}}Kenya{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}\'85
\par }{\insrsid1328142 
\par Something like that.   Which probably has a calorific value of 10 calories and it has cost 150 calories of fuel to get it here, it is stupid things like that,  I think people hope farmers markets might pick up and they might buy locally.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 What do you think would be a good thing to come out of this project?
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 Out of the project?  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Anything that might have a positive impact on farmers health.
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 At least this way you are getting to monitor the farmers and the businessman and see how it\rquote s affecting them.  I don\rquote t know, I think  the way the diaries are being filled in I don\rquote 
t know how they are doing it but I am just mentioning all the rubbish that I am doing that day, where I am going, wh
at I am doing.  I am sure you will be able to track people how they are socialising, whether it is affecting them socially, whether they don\rquote t go out as much.  Well you don\rquote t have a record of their health before so you can\rquote 
t compare their heath in the next 18 months compared with what it was in the last 18 month.  I don\rquote t know  
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 Maybe we could chat about that another time.  Is there anything I haven\rquote t asked you that\'85
\par 
\par }{\insrsid1328142 No, I don\rquote t know if I have said anything that is of  any use to you.
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid1328142 It has been very useful yes.
\par }}