{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\sbasedon0 \snext20 Body Text 2;}{\s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext21 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs22 \additive \super 
\sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid3213946\rsid3233319\rsid5969381\rsid5984899\rsid6185487\rsid8015325\rsid12869469\rsid12935805\rsid15357526\rsid16073870}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info
{\author Health Research Lancaster University}{\operator UKDA}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo10\dy10\hr9\min52}{\version9}{\edmins33}{\nofpages42}{\nofwords9364}{\nofchars53375}{\*\company Lancaster University}{\nofcharsws62614}
{\vern16391}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\linestart5\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot12869469 \fet0{\*\docvar {ACTIVE}{JBPM 15 25.02.02.doc}}{\*\docvar {VTCASE}{4}}{\*\docvar {VTCommandPending}{NONE}}{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \linemod5\linex0\linestarts5\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {
\insrsid5984899 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria\tab :  \tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\insrsid12869469 Lancaster University}{\insrsid5984899 
\par Interview ID:  PM15
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17\insrsid5984899 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid5969381 20}}}{\cs17\insrsid5984899 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid5984899 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\ul\insrsid5984899 Date of Interview: 25/02/02
\par 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\fs24\insrsid5984899 Date of birth: 1949
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5984899 Gender: F
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs22\fs24\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{\insrsid5984899  }{\b\insrsid5984899 Group 1 }{\insrsid5984899 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\insrsid5984899 Group 2 }{\insrsid5984899 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\insrsid5984899 Group 3 }{\insrsid5984899 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{\b\insrsid5984899 .
\par Group 4 }{\insrsid5984899 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\insrsid5984899 Group 5 }{\insrsid5984899 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\insrsid5984899 Group 6 }{\insrsid5984899 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{\f36\insrsid5984899 
\par }}}{\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par Geographic region: North Cumbria
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b0\i\f0\insrsid5984899 The interview took place in the respondent\rquote 
s study in her comfortable, large converted farmhouse. The house is in a very remote, quiet part of the county and she has to travel 12 miles on narrow local roads to get to work each day. The respondent\rquote 
s younger daughter (in her early 20s) was at home in another part of the house and the respondent\rquote s husband came home from work towards the end of then interview. 
\par }\pard \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par Can I just ask you what you remember about the start of the outbreak last year?}{\b0\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5984899 Erm (long pause)I don\rquote 
t remember a great deal about the actual very beginnings, because it didn\rquote 
t really sort of hit home immediately.  It was only when they discovered that infected stock had been at Longtown Mart, Market, and erm, the first farm, we very euphemistically said \'93went\'94.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par \'93Had gone\'94, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par Nobody said, \'93have foot and mouth\'94, it was \'93went\'94 or \'93gone\'94, erm, it was a very big farm and their younger son was in my class,
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5984899 
Right, Can we just say for the tape that you teach at Longtown, what age group do you teach?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par Reception, four to five year olds. So he was, he was four, so he wasn\rquote t five, and they had about five and a half thousand sheep, and about four hundred and fifty cattle and it\rquote s a family farm. So, }{\fs24\insrsid6185487 [the boy]}{
\fs24\insrsid5984899 \rquote s grandfather and his father, are part and parcel
 of the everyday working on the farm, a big farm, quite a good wealthy farm. But, they, the mum is also one of our governors and she rang me to tell me about it, and to tell me that they obviously had to keep the children at home. She tried to get them to
 Newcastleton to her mother-in-law, no her mother, and couldn\rquote t, they wouldn\rquote t let her, take the children. They weren\rquote 
t allowed to move them, so they had to stay on the farm while the squads moved in and dug all the pits, and built the fires and then killed and burnt all the animals. And, she said when she brought him back to school, everyday he said
\par  \'93How many more sleeps before I go back to school, how many more sleeps?\'94  That\rquote s all he ever said and, he came back to school and I just said, \'93How are you?\'94  And he said \'93I\rquote m fine and I\rquote m getting puppy\'94
.  And I think they really played it really well because he, they got this puppy and as soon as they could, and because by then all there was left on the farm was a couple of farm dogs.  There wasn\rquote t another anim
al, so, erm. We had children in nursery who when they had the farm sets (}{\i\fs24\insrsid5984899 toys}{\fs24\insrsid5984899 
) out, got the tractors and the diggers and pretended they were digging pits and they lined the cattle and the sheep upside down, to pretend they were being burnt, because they\rquote d seen it, erm. 
\par And gradually this little area here (}{\i\fs24\insrsid5984899 referring to the area round her home}{\fs24\insrsid5984899 ), which had got more and more enclosed, the area itself looks nothing but they\rquote 
ve got really whittled down, so right up to Sleetbeck they all went.  All the sheep and animals went that way. A lot of the farmers allowed their sheep to be culled to protect their cattle.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 Mm
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par Erm, but we had a lot of children off school, a good few, for a week or two and some that were off for six weeks, erm, it did affect them, 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par erm, but they talked about it 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par and the more they talk about it the easier it gets for them
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5984899 In what way would you say it affected them?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs24\insrsid5984899 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5984899 Erm, they didn\rquote t like their farms. They didn\rquote 
t like their homes. Er, one of the, one of the older ones said to me \lquote cos they, we have them \lquote til they\rquote re seven, one of the older ones in the school said to me,
\par \'93I just, I just don\rquote t like it, \'93and I said 
\par \'93Why?\'94 
\par \'93Well when I go in the sheds it\rquote s all spooky\'94, 
\par \'93Why\rquote s it spooky?\'94 
\par \'93Because there\rquote s no noise\'94. Because the sheds were empty, and all their little lives from being tots, they\rquote d gone in and seen the noise of animals eating and whatever else, and there just wasn\rquote t the noise so they didn\rquote 
t like it. So, and we heard lots of harrowing tales about er farmers and their wives, you know people barricading themselves into their farms.  And, er, it made it very difficult, (}{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 Great emphasis here}{\f0\insrsid5984899 ) I felt }{
\f0\ul\insrsid5984899 so}{\f0\insrsid5984899  bad, driving from here into Longtown to go to work. School was shut for one week and then they decided that they\rquote d got, well they didn\rquote 
t even do it then, they waited until it was nearly over before they put all the er .....mats on road, erm, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Was school closed because of the risk of infection or because of the pyres?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, because of, well because of the risk of the infection being taken from one place to another. I mean the school bus, \lquote cos we have a lot of children who are bussed in from farms 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par So they didn\rquote t want, I mean obviously the farmers didn\rquote t want the buses to come anywhere near their farms or anything else. So, erm, my husband has to go into Carlisle to work, I mean that\rquote 
s twenty-five miles from here. I go into Longtown and I just, I said to him one day,
\par \'93}{\f0\ul\insrsid5984899 If}{\f0\insrsid5984899 , it gets up here, somebody\rquote ll point the finger at us\'94, I said  \'93We\rquote re not going to live here, we\rquote re not\'94, (laugh) I really felt so guilty, \lquote cos even if it hadn
\rquote t been me\'85 I mean, we, we bought the big sack of disinfectant, you know 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par to put in, the powder, to put into, and }{\f0\insrsid12935805 [husband]}{\f0\insrsid5984899  bought a big back pack so we could spray all the tyres and the cars and everything. But erm, and I mean, there\rquote s a farm past our house there\rquote 
s a farm there, (points in the other direction) and everywhere I go it\rquote s all farmland. So I couldn\rquote t phone in and say\'85 so, and after the week was up we were told, we had to open up and go back and, the parents who didn\rquote 
t want their children to go to school well they could keep them off.  But of course obviously the town children, their parents were going nuts because they wanted them at school, erm so\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Were there many that did keep their children off, you said a few\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 We had erm, ...a lot of them kept them away but then were included in either a cull, or
 were, were taken as infected. So as soon as that three day period was over the children came back to school, and that, I think the children were pleased to come back to school and their parents were definitely pleased that they\rquote 
d come back to school because at least there was something for them to do. I did send work home for six weeks to twins. They lived in a house, on a farm, although they, their mother\rquote 
s not part and parcel of the farm. But they lived there and of course their dogs and everything were there and she just didn\rquote 
t want to risk bringing it onto that farm.  So we had courier systems worked out, so it was you know, the work was put in a file and the file was taken to this gatepost here and that person took it to that one there and then it was 
passed on you know. But I mean it worked, we, we got the work backwards and forwards and the mum was very good and she did lots with them ...doesn\rquote 
t...even doing things practising at home they missed a lot of teaching, direct teaching so that was worrying.
 But, er, there was three of them; a seven year old and two four year olds, but eventually you know it eased off and they did come back. But. I saw, I mean, I don\rquote 
t, I know quite a few of the farmers round here, but on my way to school, you know, early in the morning you see a lot of people in tractors and you, you know you get to the point where you recognise people 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par and I\rquote ve been doing it five years so I recognise everything, and I was going past places and I\rquote d see them and they\rquote d kind of do this }{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 (very small acknowledging wave of hand)}{\f0\insrsid5984899   and there
\rquote d be the wagons there and, and the men in the white suits and, and people.  I\rquote ve seen more farmers in tears than children really I suppose these last, these last, that last year. Erm one of the big farms I g
o past, I went one morning to school and I had to phone the school from the car to say that I was stopped.  \lquote Cos I couldn\rquote t get past, \lquote 
cos some of our lanes are very narrow, there was erm, two huge wagons, filled with coal and there must have been er, the 
squad, the killing squad, going in.  And there was diggers and they were just coming on low loaders and then moving all these diggers.  Well I just couldn\rquote 
t get past, and the two big wagons had to try and tip their coal, well most of it went on the verge, 
but a lot of it was on the road and I , I mean I really had trouble getting past.  And I was stopped like that several times, different farms, and just had to sit there while they got on with stuff.  The worst one was later when they had killed them all a
nd then had to pick them up and take them to the different places, because that was just, the stench, just\'85 \lquote 
cos when they killed them, then they just left and some of those animals were left ten days before they were picked up.  Ten days just to sit and rot.  I\rquote 
ve a little girl in my class now she was six then and has 2 older sisters and they had a farm.  And they\rquote d gone to the farm and killed the cattle and they\rquote d killed them in the sheds in the divided\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 In the cubicles?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes and then they were left and of course they\rquote d swollen up and then when they came to get them out they couldn\rquote 
t get them out.  So they had to use you know loops round their feet, drag them out and then of course they all saw, because they\rquote d blown up so much with gas then they had to be cut to release the gases and things like that.  And she\rquote d left
\'85  this all was happening at the back of the house and she (mother) kept the girls in the front of the house, but then at some point in the evening she\rquote d had to go to get logs for the fire, she 
went out of her back door, and recoiled because this was a job that was supposed to be done}{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 ,( finished}{\f0\insrsid5984899 
) . All she could see was pieces of animals all over her yards and the smell was horrendous.  And this is a very mild mannered woman she was laughing and 
always smiling and always cheerful, she went back in the house, she got on the phone to, the, head office you know, the General?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 The Brigadier?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par and said if they didn\rquote t have somebody out at her farm within half an hour, there was going to be trouble. I th
ink she was threatening threats and all sorts.  And, so she got one of the head guys from MAFF, and, she, he came to the front door. She sent him, she said \'93Go round to the yard please\'94, }{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 (he)}{\f0\insrsid5984899 
 walked into the yard and recoiled, and ran to throw up.  She said \'93 And you expect me and my three daughters to live in this? Better get somebody quick\'94. And that was it, there was a cleaning squad in straight away.  Shouldn\rquote 
t happen, it shouldn\rquote t have happened it was awful. So, it\rquote s, I\rquote ve always been, I\rquote ve just been on the periphery of things just seeing things.  Both my sons, well my son-in-law}{\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{\insrsid5984899  .}}}{\f0\insrsid5984899 
 and my son-in-law-to-be both work for a contractor (?) who contracted out to dig a lot of the\'85 to do a lot of the\'85 a lot of the clearing up and things.  And erm, Alan\rquote s qu
alified to drive those huge machines you know, erm, but he spent three days once just chopping cows in half with a bucket on his machine.  Because they knew when they buried them, because they\rquote 
d tried it, they floated back to the surface when they, with th
e gas, so they had to chop them in half. James, the younger one, he was handed a big long sharp piece of metal and told to run through a cattle shed and stab each one in the stomach as he went. Well he got covered in stuff, and he eventually ended up goin
g to the doctors and having to get antibiotics and things because he got erm a bacteria on him that you can get from handling dead animals.  And it affected his nose, ears, so he was\'85
 he started having nightmares, so they took him off that.  But my son-in-l
aw put a brave face on it and you know, made a joke of it and said for him, sheep were slimy green things now, not, the white woolly things. So, it was pretty nasty, even though we weren\rquote t directly affected.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 It sounds as though at school you were hearing a lot of stories weren\rquote t you? It wasn\rquote t just an individual experience \lquote cos you were hearing a lot\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 And it wasn\rquote t just, it wasn\rquote t particularly from the children, it was the parents coming and they wanted to tell, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par They needed to tell somebody, they needed to say what they\rquote d seen and what had been happening and you\rquote ve got to listen, I mean I\rquote m there as a listener anywhere. I hate to think how many marriages I\rquote 
ve heard have broken up and they\rquote ve been weeping on my shoulder but that\rquote s, you\rquote re there as part and parcel of that.  You\rquote re dealing with their young children so they\rquote re you know they just coming to you, I suppose it
\rquote s nice that they trust you
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, yes
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Erm, but er,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 But it\rquote s still a lot for you
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Er, it can be quite traumatic sometimes when, especially when it\rquote s somebody you haven\rquote t sort of\'85 a lot of kids you sort of think it\rquote 
s going to happen, you know you hear things. You know, children say things, sometimes it\rquote s a big shock.  And then, I mean that\'85 this. I mean our secretary has a farm, her husband\rquote 
s a dairy farmer, so every day she was on the internet and she was checking up on farms, you know. And she\rquote d say \'93oh, so and so\rquote s gone, so and so\rquote s gone, and so and so\rquote s gone\'94,  it just, it\rquote d just go l
ike wildfire, at one point it really was, we didn\rquote t think there was going to be an animal left in Cumbria
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 What helped you? I mean that must have been very hard, did you talk to each other at school, talk at home?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Oh yes, yes, everybody did, erm, I mean my two daughters were hearing things from you know, from husband and fianc\'e9 and they\rquote d come and they\rquote d tell us.  And, and so obviously }{\f0\insrsid16073870 [husband and fianc
\'e9]}{\f0\insrsid5984899  were, telling the girls. I think that\rquote s the only way people survived it, because they could talk to somebody else. Erm, but there were so many mistakes made. I mean you\rquote 
d go on the internet and it would, and it would say that there was only six farms, that day, in this area.  And then Kay at school would say, but I\rquote ve talked to so and so and so and so, and their farms have gone as well, and they\rquote 
re not on there.  And we\rquote re quite certain, because it was so orchestrated, that, if it got past a certain number, they just didn\rquote t put them up that day, because they didn\rquote t want it to look as if it was escalati
ng and that it was getting worse, more, as Alice in Wonderland said worser and worser than they said you know? They really tried to hold it back and make it look as if it wasn\rquote 
t as bad, but because we were in the know and we had, you know channels in, we heard lots of things that shouldn\rquote 
t have happened and did happen. But er, I mean one day I drove out of here, beautiful spring day, all the spring flowers were out, and I\rquote d, I\rquote d actually said to my husband at the weekend, 
\par \'93Look at this, God\rquote s trying to make up for this because look at all the flowers\'94
.  Everywhere you looked there were just masses of wild flowers and there was all the daffodils and everything else and it just looked so beautiful, blue skies and sunshine. But the one thing missing, all nice 
little white lambs gambolling around in the field, there wasn\rquote t one in sight and when I did see some on the way to Brampton\'85 the farmer there, because you obviously couldn\rquote t move them, and he had sheep in lamb and normally they\rquote 
d, they\rquote d bring them nearer, so they can look after them.  And he\rquote d had them out on his fields and he\rquote 
d gone with tarpaulins and bales of straw and making them little places to shelter so if the weather was cold or wet they could take their lambs inside, because I mean the sheep do have a bit of sense and they\rquote 
ll get inside and get them, the lambs, keep the lambs dry and warm.  And he\rquote d done all this and he\rquote d really worked and worked and worked and I went past one day at the weekend I was on my way down to my daughter\rquote s and there was 
two heaps and they were just lying by the side of the road waiting to be collected one day, and I cried then. (upset here).............and I see the farmer\rquote s wife sitting crying and the farmer sitting crying and we were just wondering what on earth
\rquote s going to go on? How\rquote s it all going to end?  And my husband\rquote s convinced it\rquote s not finished and it\rquote s coming back. And I just, I just don\rquote t know how anybody\rquote d cope with that, so ........and I\rquote 
m not convinced that they were right anyway,. 
\par We have a family at school, they have two farms, and land somewhere else separate from the farms and they\rquote 
d bought some stock at Longtown, when the supposedly infected stock were there. And another farmer got stock for them to look after them for a while so they\rquote d gone straight fro
m the mart to the other farm. So of course as soon as they did the check, and started doing the checking up, these animals were classed as highly dangerous contacts and were to be killed immediately, because they\rquote 
d been on his farm and in contact with his 
animals they were all to be killed. And he had a dairy herd as well as sheep, and I watched them all burn, every day I went past. I went past for about four weeks and they burned for about four weeks, and he, so they, where they had land they were all tak
en from there as well and their two farms. So, all, those animals went, now there was loads of blood tests taken both before they actually killed them \lquote 
cos none of them were exhibiting any signs of having the disease.  And, ever since, so that poor farmer who was just looking after those few animals for him, he lost everything and they lost everything.  And, the lady in question said to me, 
\par \'93Ah well, that\rquote s it, we\rquote ve got two dogs and a cat now\'94, and I said \'93How are you coping?\'94, and she said \'93well, there\rquote s nothing we can do, just waiting for the blood tests to come back\'94
, and I saw her later, actually saw her in the pub and this was months later,  and I just said \'93how are you doing?\'94, and she said \'93oh we\rquote re getting on alright you know\'94, I said \'93thinking about restocking yet?\'94, \'93no not yet\'94
 she said, and she said \'93and all those blood tests\'94, I said \'93yes\'94, she said \'93not one of them came back positive\'94. So out of all that lot not one came back positive.  So, you know, you just wonder how many of them did actuall
y have it ...and it just, especially when you see the saw them running around in the fields and then suddenly a heap lying for a bulldozer to come and get them the next day.
\par And a farmer we know, on the other side of the valley, not in a cull area, \lquote cos it didn\rquote 
t get far enough here, and certainly not infected. He had had a phone call while he was here to say they were coming to cull his sheep the next day and he just said \'93Okay then\'94. You see, authority, you know, people agree. I wonder if they think abou
t it ...and he rang around and said \'93Have any more gone? You know has anybody else, been, told they\rquote ve got, got the foot and mouth? Is it anymore to push me into it that a three k or a two k cull area?\'94 Couldn\rquote 
t find anything so he rang them back and he said \'93I don\rquote t understand why you\rquote ve said my sheep\'94. He said \'93Would you like to check this for me?\'94 
\par \'93Oh yes we\rquote ll check, we\rquote ll ring you back\'94. Didn\rquote t ring him back. So he rang again the next day, first thing, when they were supposed to be coming to kill them, and got a hold of somebody else who passed him on, 
\par \'93Oh yeah, it\rquote s okay we\rquote re not coming now because erm, we\rquote d made a mistake\'94. Now if he hadn\rquote t queried that, they\rquote d have culled his, then they\rquote d have said to the next farmer
\par  \'93Well we\rquote ve culled his (now we\rquote ll cull you out}{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 , exact words unclear}{\f0\insrsid5984899 )\'94  it would have just wiped this little area out, if he\rquote d have let them go. And, I think it\rquote 
s the mistakes like that I can\rquote t live with. I find that very hard to deal with, and I think everybody else did. It isn\rquote t, it\rquote s just not, I mean there wasn\rquote t enough forethought was there, and there wasn\rquote t enough,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Do you think people feel angry because they have no control over that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 I think it is, it\rquote s, it\rquote s, it\rquote s \lquote we know best, we\rquote re going to do it, you just sit there and just accept what we say\rquote , there\rquote 
s no, there was no give or take about it. It just seemed it was up, \lquote right that\rquote s it, your sheep are next, your cattle are next\rquote .  Erm, and when I drove down here one beautiful spring day, and counted twelve pyres o
n my way down to Longtown, twelve,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 And how many miles did you say that was?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Er it\rquote s about twelve miles, but I mean I could see further, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par \lquote Cos you know you can see almost to the Solway and places.  But it, it really, I mean twelve, twelve huge fires
 burning.  And a few times we got down, I got down to school, and Longtown, I dunno it seems to lie in a dip, and, the, the smoke is very heavy and oily, and, and it just settles and it was like driving into a, into a thick fog in places. And you get into
 the, and it wasn\rquote t so bad up here 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par because we have the hills and the road you know, and only, only two or three times did we actually get the smell here and one of those was from a Scottish burn. Yeah, the wind was blowing this way, so we got, and th
at was horrendous one night, that was really bad.  But as you got down into the town, you could feel it and you could taste it.  And there was a few days, I mean I\rquote d, I\rquote d gone in and I\rquote 
d just, I mean one day it was my yard duty and I said \'93There\rquote s no way I\rquote m taking the children out in that\'94. I said \'93I don\rquote t think it\rquote s safe, you don\rquote t know what\rquote s in that smoke\'94. I know it\rquote 
s only supposed to be burning animals but they put in wood, coal, fuel oil, and straw and heaven only knows what else plus there\rquote s the animals.  And you don\rquote t whether the animals have got this disease or not and whether it\rquote 
s airborne or whether it, whether it can just be carried in the smoke. You don\rquote t know, and that was the trouble, we, we and we still don\rquote t know.  So there was a few, good few days where, when it was playtime we just didn\rquote 
t take the children outside because, of the smell as much as anything. I mean it was making them gag,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I was going to ask, did it affect them?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, yes I mean some mornings they were coming in, and they were coming in and their mothers were, \lquote 
cos usually I open my door and leave it open for them all to get in.  And they were shutting the door behind them and somebody was sort of standing by the door \lquote cos they\rquote 
ve got those security locks and somebody was just positioning themselves by the door and standing there for ten minutes opening the door for other people because they didn\rquote t want the door left open.  Because they didn\rquote t want the stuff in the
, in the classroom where the children were going to be. It was bad enough walking through it. I mean in, in the middle of you know, spring, they were walking in with scarves over their faces because the smell was so horrid. And, and I\rquote 
ve got to say that driving down a few times going past some of the farms where they were burning, I was gagging in the car. I mean there was no way you could keep it out of the car, it\rquote d get you, even if you\rquote 
ve got everything shut off it still got you. And it was just the feel of it, was just as nasty as anything else really, I mean you just felt dirty, and I don\rquote 
t know how the poor people coped living in the farmhouses with these things just twenty yards away, because some of them weren\rquote t even that, horrendous
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Were you involved at that meeting at Longtown, do you know anybody else who was actually involved, where they protested against the big pyre?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, yes, oh the one on the so-called airfield.  Yes, erm...I would say the people who went were the ones who are more verbal and vocal. But there was a huge number of people who didn\rquote 
t go, but, they wanted that stopped. So they let that be known, and I think it was more like representatives went erm, I didn\rquote t go, I couldn\rquote t go I\rquote m afraid. Erm, I mean, I, it\rquote s funny you\rquote re in a clef
t stick sometimes being, being seen as one of the, one of the establishment, in the town, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par You know, the, the authority figure in school you know and this sort of thing.  And er, and I didn\rquote t know that it would good to show, and shout about, \lquote cos I wo
uld have shouted (laughs). I mean I did tell, I did tell somebody, if they wanted me for picket duty or anything like that I\rquote d come and stand and wave a banner because I didn\rquote 
t agree with it. Not so close to the town.  I felt, I mean there must be places f
urther away they could have done that. And, the gentleman concerned with that, got money for allowing them to do that on his land right? And he let his lips flap a little bit in the town and he ended up getting knocked around a little bit. Because the tow
n\rquote s people saw it as he was, he was bragging about what he was making and of course they would treble and quadruple the amount of money he was getting, which was a bit silly of him. Erm, but they}{\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote 
\pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{\insrsid5984899 
 The farmer in question had lost all his stock to foot and mouth}}}{\f0\insrsid5984899  lost everything so, I suppose, you know. And all this talk of compensation, the money the farmers got, in my mind it wasn\rquote 
t compensation. It was to pay them, for the animals that they\rquote d lost which was no fault of their own, compensation is when you\rquote re given money in lieu of what you couldn\rquote 
t make. And none of them got any of that, they only got paid for the animals that they lost. They didn\rquote t say well you would have made on an average year, you\rquote d have made ten thousand pounds, on these sheep this year, so there\rquote 
s the ten thousand you lost, nobody got that. There was a lot of shouting about how much money the farmers were getting, some of them had nothing. And down the road, these farmers over the border in Scotland, and they had their animals culled an
d four months later they hadn\rquote t got a penny, not for the animals, nothing. So they had bank overdrafts by then of around forty odd thousand pounds they weren\rquote 
t compensated to pay the interest that the bank had charged them for going overdrawn you know. And I know there\rquote 
s a lot of farmers driving around here, new cars, new tractors, and had a holiday.  And boy oh boy these farmers up here work, and if for once they didn\rquote t have an overdraft to pay because it got paid off, I can understand them wanting a holid
ay. I can understand their wives want a holiday,  wanting a new car, and so he\rquote s got a new tractor. You know, erm, a lot of people think they\rquote 
ve been throwing their money around and, you know being a bit flash and that, but they still have to live and their living off the money that\rquote 
s to buy their next animals, to make their living.  And as my husband says the average farmer, farmers earnings in this part of the world, last year, what they made, after they\rquote d taken their salaries and whatever out, their prof
its were about two thousand three hundred pounds for their farms. Now when you\rquote ve taken the ones that don\rquote t make any profit and the ones that make a good bit of profit and average it all out, they\rquote 
re not exactly over doing it are they? And I could understand why they wanted a new car
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 You think some of them in a way\'85 like you say you do it to cheer you up
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 A little bit of shopping therapy, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Mm
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par And the women never managed to have a holiday with their husband for years some of them, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par So, it was \'93Wow\'94 you know and off they went, I mean they didn\rquote t go to big flash places, you know, I mean some of them only went to Oasis for four days but it was the first time they\rquote 
d had a family holiday for years. So, I think in a lot of cases you know they\rquote re lying  and I think that\rquote s the press, you know on about this compensation, I said \lquote I want that word changing, it\rquote s not compensation\rquote , they
\rquote re being compensated for the money they\rquote ve lost fair enough, you know, you lost your earnings because you couldn\rquote t sell your animals, but still have to use that money to buy more of them, there\rquote 
s a few of them restocking, but not many, not yet
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Is that why there\rquote s some still (inaudible 322)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 There\rquote s an awful lot haven\rquote t done it,  erm..............I think, we\rquote ve seen small flocks of sentinels in, in parts, erm (inaudible 326) erm seen a few flocks and kids come in and said, \'93oh we\rquote 
ve got some, we\rquote ve got some sheep\'94 you know, and I\rquote ve said \'93What sort of sheep?\'94  And they say, \'93Well those ones that have to go everywhere\'94, right they\rquote re sentinels, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par And, and also the farmers can\rquote t, they can\rquote t let anybody onto the farm or off it, well, the children still came to school, so they must have something but they were not allowed to let anybody go onto the farm
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I think the family can have a licence to come and go can\rquote t they? anybody else has to have a licence
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes but they can\rquote t have anybody else on and off, that\rquote s it. So, erm, we\rquote ve had few who\rquote ve done that and we have a few who have erm, one of my little boys c
ame in they had dairy, erm, they have two farms, Grandad and Dad again. Erm, and he came in absolutely ecstatic about oh, three or four weeks ago, he said Oh Mrs Rowland we\rquote ve got some cows, we\rquote ve got some cows!\'94 and I said \'93
Have you really/\'94 \'93Yes!\'94 he said, \'93And we\rquote re getting some more soon!\'94 I said \'93That\rquote s wonderful\'94, I said \'93So you\rquote re looking forward to seeing the cows out in the fields again?\'94, \'93Yes!\'94
 he said (inaudible 342) about a week or ten days later he told me they\rquote d got some more and after that, obviously the cows are milking now. And he\rquote s, he\rquote 
s and he was actually buying a little carton of milk at school to have for his drink, His Mum came in and said \'93I\rquote m sorry }{\f0\insrsid8015325 [name]}{\f0\insrsid5984899  we won\rquote t have that anymore\'94, he said \'93No, now we\rquote 
ve got the real milk I\rquote m not going to bother with that horrible stuff\'94, (laugh) so he likes his milk straight from the cow. So but erm, he and his brother are in school and they, they\rquote re really happy that they\rquote 
ve got their animals back. But there\rquote s, you still drive round and there\rquote d more empty fields than there\rquote s fields with anything in.  In fact we were driving round I think it was last weekend (inaudible 353) and I said \'93Oh there
\rquote s three sheep in that field!\'94 you know, then we went a bit further and says, \'93Oh there\rquote s two sheep in that field!\'94, you know. and a bit further again and then \'93Oh there\rquote s three sheep in that field\'94 and he said \'93
well have they all, have them fields all been opened up?\'94 and I said \'93Well no because they\rquote re different farms so they\rquote re mebbe just got the first few\'94, for at, the farm up the road as you\rquote 
re going towards Sleatbeck there,  went past there one day when it actually wasn\rquote t raining, and there was three lambs in the field as well as them and I went \'93Oh lambs!\'94 (laugh) so, it makes a big difference, a big difference. 
\par But I mean, I was, I was still driving, I was thinking about them when I was driving in the other morning and I said to, I said to my husband \'93Just look how many empty fields there still are\'94. I mean there are dairy herds I haven\rquote 
t seen now, for, months and months and months and I\rquote m not sure that they actually still exist. I think they may have gone, but because I don\rquote 
t know the names of all the farms... Erm, I mean there was a Guernsey herd down there, and they were absolutely gorgeous, and they all wore these yellow collars and looked at you very soothingly as you went past. I haven\rquote 
t seen them since last year. Well it\rquote d be before last year \lquote cos they take them in in the winter 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par anyway, so they, they\rquote d been taken in and there was a little Jersey herd down the road as well, I mean, everybody looks at jerseys and goes \'93aah\'94,  they went, they actually got it
\par 
\par }{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 Respondent\rquote s husband came in and asked \'93Would you like another cup of tea or anything?\'94 (tape off)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 It has been awful, this particular year, it really has
\par }{\i\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I think possibly in your position it\rquote s as you say people trust you, they talk to you and you are you know, you\rquote re gathering a lot of experiences together aren\rquote t you? And you can\rquote 
t escape that, because you can\rquote t say \'93no I don\rquote t want to hear about that thank you\'94
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 No, no that\rquote s, erm, and the thing is even, even the people around here, when, you know when it was at it\rquote s height and they didn\rquote 
t know that this area was going to be alright, they were all very worried. And, when you spoke to anybody, it didn\rquote t matter, what you\rquote 
d stopped to say,  it always immediately went to foot and mouth. Every conversation went immediately to foot and mouth. And, I don\rquote t know whether I should say this on this tape or not, I had mum last year who when it all 
started at the end of February, she came in and she said to me, \'93you know my dad deals in sleepers?\'94, (inaudible 392) \'93yes\'94, she said \'93
Do you know he got a phone call, right at the beginning of January about the second or third, from MAFF or somebody like that, I\rquote m not sure, can\rquote 
t be sure of that. and they said to him have you got enough sleepers to deal with the foot and mouth outbreak?\'94, and I said \'93Really?\'94, she said \'93Oh yes\'94, she said \'93And my dad\rquote s been checking and it wasn\rquote 
t just him who was asked either\'94. I said well, in January? It apparently didn\rquote t get going \lquote til Febuary, how did they know? And I heard another story from my son-in-law, and he\rquote 
s on a farm somewhere and there was some men who were there to kill the animals, and they were a team and they were from further down country.  And he said he got chatting to them 'cos they had different accents so he said \'93Where are you from then?\'94
 and all the rest of it, and one of them turned round and said \'93Do you know?\'94, he said, \'93This is what these, those animals had, that we killed last November down in\'85\'94
 and named a county much further down the country, and they were told they had to sign something he said to (inaudible 412) well whether this is true or not, to say that they wouldn\rquote t talk about it ........
.(inaudible 415) so with stories like that going around and farmers absolutely one hundred percent sure, that it couldn\rquote 
t have happened they way they said it happened, erm, it makes you wonder, and because it sort of, all of a sudden, it was there, there, there, there and there all round the country, I don\rquote t think they could blame Armstrong\rquote s}{
\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{\insrsid5984899 
 livestock haulage company based at Longtown, }}}{\f0\insrsid5984899  for everything, which is what they seemed to do
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 The hauliers?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, yes, well their, one of their directors, or is she chairman, I think she\rquote s a director, is our, chair of governors. And they were really really upset about all of that, \lquote 
cos they were really handed the poisoned chalice, it was huge you know. Erm, because they\rquote d shoved all, moved all the animals round. Erm
, I have to say, I do wonder whether it did start naturally.  It makes everybody, I know a lot of people who think it was done on purpose, because a few years ago, one of the erm, papers that came out from Brussels, suggested that Britain, should stop pro
ducing meat and go arable right?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 They\rquote d have a job in Langdale wouldn\rquote t they? (laughter)
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par  that\rquote s it you see.  So we thought round here \lquote you\rquote re joking, what crops can you grow round here?\rquote  but that was it
, because we overproduced meat, so they say. So I go and buy my meat at a local farm shop now. I do not buy it anywhere else. I buy it from them because it\rquote s all locally produced and I know where it\rquote s been, where it\rquote 
s come from and who did it. You know, mebbe it\rquote s a bit sort of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted but I said right I\rquote m now going to support my local people. And it\rquote 
s amazing how many people are, unfortunately to be able to do that you have to have an income that lets you go and buy this stuff because it\rquote 
s more expensive than, going to the supermarket. And I think a lot more people would like to do what we do. but surely if we got more local butchers into bigger co-operatives then the price could come down and at least we could af
ford it. But I, my husband\rquote s convinced that it was all set about to do this, to stop us overproducing meat and to make us only produce what we want ...(inaudible 460) it, it\rquote s the cheap stuff they import that we don\rquote t know what
\rquote s been. I mean there\rquote s all these rules and regulations for us, for our farmers that literally puts them out of business \lquote 
cos it costs that much to, to, to produce the animal the way they want them to do it. But they will import this rubbish from central Slovenia or wherever you\rquote ve got no idea what\rquote 
s gone into those animals, none whatsoever, (inaudible 470) that\rquote s it, I only eat only what I know. And I, it still doesn\rquote t make me want to be a vegetarian, it hasn\rquote 
t done that. I think can still see lambs running round in the fields and go and buy a leg of lamb at the butchers, it hasn\rquote t done that, hasn\rquote t done that with any of us, erm so, but, I prefer them to have a nicer life
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Has it make you feel differently about living here because you\rquote re right in the middle of \'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 I\rquote m very thankful that none of the farms round here actually have any problems because, I think it would have been absolutely awful living\'85 I mean, because at the time I mean, if it had happened, erm, Malcolm}{
\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{\insrsid5984899 
 near neighbour}}}{\f0\insrsid5984899 \rquote s got a dairy herd and he\rquote s got sheep and he\rquote 
s got quite a lot. erm, I think it would have been at the time when they were digging the pits and burning them on the farms, so I think probably the piece of land chosen to be used would have been that one there, and it would have been (inaudible 487)

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 This neighbouring field?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par Yes.  The one thing about this area and, and, this is, this is a farmer\rquote s theory, erm, if you look at it on the map we\rquote re quite virtually surrounded by forests.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par I mean we have a little forest here behind us, and there\rquote s a lot of Kershopefoot  and you know there\rquote s a lot of others and there\rquote s into Scotland up there, Scottish Kershope and what have you, and they reckon and the, it didn\rquote 
t blow in here because the trees acted as filters and mebbe managed to stop, the actual, bugs getting through to their animals. And that\rquote s, that\rquote 
s a farmers theory he thinks the trees were, were a filtration unit. You know so, if it works for you fine, you know, I mean, you haven\rquote t any knows what it was, mebbe just dead lucky, but it\rquote s 
er, I mean the guy down the road he has horses like, a lot of horses, and people always come to ride them and everything. They didn\rquote 
t dare let anybody get on a horse and ride them there, because he said if he walked his horses on the road and went down to Sleatbeck and come back and then some maybe over there got foot and mouth they\rquote 
d say it was him with his horses. And I said well that would you }{\f0\ul\insrsid5984899 and}{\f0\insrsid5984899  me out (laugh) because, they, obviously people looked for someone to blame because it\rquote s only human nature, you see, so \'93
What caused it? Why were we alright until then? It\rquote s because you let these people ride your horses and they brought it back in\'94,  you know, I mean., or\'94 You drove your car past these farms and brought it back on your tyres \'93
you know, Oh, it wasn\rquote t nice, it was very hard, and \lquote specially the first few weeks, going knowing that erm, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 It }{\b\i\f0\insrsid5984899 was}{\b\f0\insrsid5984899  particularly bad at Longtown though wasn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 It was yes, I mean virtually every farmer that there was in that area, went,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par  because, because of the mar
t.  I mean there was a farm, I mean his land abuts the mart, well his all went straight away you know, because they said oh well the animals there were on that side of the fence and yours were that side of the fence they could have breathed on them, so th
at was it, no, so, and the mart, they had trouble getting it cleaned,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I heard that
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par  I think it had to be done about three times, \lquote cos they kept finding the foot and mouth bacteria, both, I can\rquote t remember now
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I gather it\rquote s opened again now
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par It has yes, yes, this week, erm ..............but I was asking my son-in-law about it I said you know the cleaning and I could, James, the one who\rquote s not married, to my daughter C\rquote s fianc\'e9
, he was on his cleaning, he did cleaning for a while and, the, the thing is they\rquote d, they\rquote d just, he said you\rquote 
ve got to get it into every,  get stuck into all the grooving you know, and if they find it, a tiny tuft of hair, they just assume that that tuft of hair will still be infected, so the whole place has to be done aga
in. and that was what was happening at the market (inaudible 547) but the clean-up brought its own problems. erm I mean down the road, Catlowdy, er, they have a farm and a bed and breakfast, er I think, erm, one son, on a roof 30 foot up came through, and
 he was very seriously injured, and just as he was on the mend (tape turned over)
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 So they\rquote re both out of action?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Well no, no the one that was very badly hurt, is, is on the mend but it was his head that was damaged the most. Erm the other one\rquote s alright he just has nasty scars up his face, he \lquote 
s okay. But I mean, you know, I mean on top of everything, and these, these are farmers boys, right and all they were trying to do was make some money because they\rquote d been out of work for so long, it was like\'85 James is
 actually a farmers son, and he found killing, that the killing, the disposing of the animals, very hard. He\rquote s been brought up since he was tiny to look after animals, and people were saying, the town people were saying things like \'93
Well these farmers\rquote  lads can cope with it\'94. But these farmers\rquote 
 lads have been brought up looking after animals not destroying them and chopping them up so that they can be buried and burned, you know. Erm, I think the ones who managed it to keep on going, erm, were the, were the, the men who hadn\rquote 
t looked after animals, mebbe country born and bred but not having roots in directly with farmers. They managed it but the lads like James, who had actually been born and brought up on a farm looking after the animals they couldn\rquote t hack 
it, and there\rquote s an awful lot of them. I think there\rquote s a lot more going to happen, mental problems for a long time. Oh yes, I mean James doesn\rquote t like to talk about it, and, he, he, he thought that we\rquote 
d be biased (inaudible 572) because of what they did
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Is he the one that had the nightmares?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes and he didn\rquote t like anybody knowing he\rquote d been taken off. I sat him down and said \'93Come on you know anybody in their right mind\rquote s going think \lquote good grief how did he manage to cope for so long\rquote 
 anyway, they\rquote re not going to think anything less of you because of it, because it\rquote s just horrendous\'94. I mean some of the things he had to do was awful, so, erm, Alan coped with it better but he\rquote 
s older, and most of his work was done from inside a machine, James was actually there, handling it, and I think that, that\rquote s a bit, so,
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 When, when he was ill, you said he became ill because he got sprayed with liquids do you know whether he actually had any protective clothing or mask or anything
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Oh they did have but, you know, he said you know, they were told, \'93there\rquote s your, there\rquote s your overall erm, look after it \'93, you know, so it wasn\rquote 
t exactly disposable. And if you had a mask you were lucky at some points, because at some point, it got very tight. There wasn\rquote t, there just wasn\rquote t the stuff.  And erm and I think the other things happening as well, people were saying \'93
oh look at all these nice white overalls, that\rquote ll do when I decorate the house\'94. And so they were going off along slightly illegal channels. Erm, so it caused a shortage i
n the end, but most of the time he said he was, he was wearing his protective stuff and things like that. But erm, I mean, I don\rquote 
t think the protective stuff was protective enough to be honest , not when they were working up close with the animals. I mean he to put things round their hooves to hang them up
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 And when they were working on the cleaning, did either of them have any ill effects from chemicals do you know?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 No, they weren\rquote t, Alan, Alan didn\rquote t do anything on the cleaning, with the cleaning squads,
 erm, James did a little bit but er, (inaudible 591).  And then a lot of the farmers decided to do their own cleaning, and so their own people did it, because it was a way of employing their own farm hands that had been laid off you know, for months on en
d. So, erm, my husband works for a company who erm have contracts to go round all the farms and put right the electrics that have been damaged by the cleaning, process. And erm, whether it wasn\rquote 
t quite by the cleaning process, (laughs) but, I think a lot of farmers got away with quite a bit.  But I mean, but the cleaning process was so, I mean I know somebody who had a shed \'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I think I know what you\rquote re going to say
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par (laughs) fell down, so they said \'93Don\rquote t worry\'94, but that shed, because it hadn\rquote t been cleane
d it was all packed up onto pallets and wrapped in plastic to keep it erm, from, allowing it contact with the atmosphere.  And, the pallets were being buried, right. So, }{\f0\insrsid15357526 [name]}{\f0\insrsid5984899 
 did a huge fire pit and they got it all done, they got it, they got the coals to get it lit as fast as they can.  So they worked like mad then just as they were about to light it, about ten o\rquote clock at night \lquote 
cos they were working from six in the morning \lquote til midnight and after sometimes, erm, they got a, \'93Don\rquote t light it\'94.  And two da
ys later they had to start and dismantle the whole thing. And because the animals had been on it, everything had to be vacuum packed on pallets.  And then holes had to be dug where, they had, they could put it, because the animals could have contaminated 
it, right down to the straw and the coal and the fuel oil.  So the pit got bigger because they also had to dig out the soil that was you know, the first bit they put all the way round it
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 So they put the animals on the pyre and then cancelled it?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, and that happened a few times, and they, they still don\rquote t know where all that\rquote s going ... I do know when he was up at Hespin Wood, they came, they said, you know, they said \'93There\rquote 
s you know like three thirty tonne trucks coming\'94 or something like that, I dunno, three huge trucks coming, all with dead cattle, \'93Start digging a hole for them\'94
.  And he said at one point, they kept going and starting to dig and bringing up parts of animals, start again and start again, and it, and it, loads of places where he dug and they\rquote d already been \lquote cos he hadn\rquote 
t been there all the time so, but nobody had marked where they\rquote d put them.  So I wouldn\rquote t, I wouldn\rquote t go anywhere near Hespin Wood for anything now, supposed to be a landfill site ...(inaudible 620) and I wouldn\rquote t like to
 be anybody who\rquote s husband or father or brother worked there.  Erm. I mean, we used to impress upon the boys, \'93For heaven\rquote s sake be very careful, you know, keep as clean as you can, keep protected\'94. I mean Alan wasn\rquote t so bad 
\lquote cos he was in his cab. But, you know, \'93For goodness sake watch what you\rquote re doing it\rquote s not worth getting a week\rquote s salary now to end up with, a severe illness in your early forties, or late thirties\'94. You know \'93
Be careful\'94, so when he}{\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 
\chftn }{\insrsid5984899  younger daughter\rquote s fianc\'e9}}}{\f0\insrsid5984899  came back he had this little rash, \'93Oh leave me alone\'94, erm. He couldn\rquote 
t actually work, he actually lived with my eldest daughter and her husband at their house for a while, \lquote cos his father was on a farm.  so he couldn\rquote t go home, \lquote cos he was going into infected farms.  He couldn\rquote t
 go home, he couldn\rquote t come up here, he couldn\rquote t \lquote cos weren\rquote t in an infected area. So we said \'93I\rquote m sorry\'94 you know, \'93You could have come but\'94 I daren\rquote 
t, I just dare not let him come, because of everybody else. And he went, being a farmer\rquote s son he said, \'93There\rquote s no way I\rquote d come anyway\'94,  you know, because he didn\rquote t want to go round anywhere else.  So he stayed with}{
\f0\insrsid15357526  }{\cs22\f0\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s21\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\cs22\super\insrsid5984899 \chftn }{
\insrsid5984899  respondent\rquote s elder daughter}}}{\f0\insrsid5984899 , she said he come in one night and he was (feverish) (inaudible 633) says \'93Well that\rquote s it right, in the morning, doctors, no \lquote got to go to work\rquote \'94
, so she, she just made him, took him, she took him to the doctors and erm, it was this\'85 and he got this antibiotic cream and things.  So, but it was quite common apparently, quite a lot of them got, (inaudible 637)type of bl
isters came up first. Bacteria that\rquote s on dead animals that transfers obviously because they\rquote re handling them, so, you know\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 How\rquote s the future looking now, how does it feel in Longtown now, a year on?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 I think the townspeople have virtually forgotten about it. Erm, and now that the marts open and the wagons\rquote 
ll be rolling backwards and forwards and anybody who was still out of work will probably be re-employed. So there won't be a problem there, erm. I think ...as far as Longtown goes.  I think, people have very short term memories and I think if it wasn
\rquote t mentioned I think they\rquote ll probably just all forget it. \lquote Oh yeah, can you remember when that happened?\rquote   and that and that, it\rquote s still there on their doorstep \lquote cos we\rquote ve still got that place where they
\rquote ve been burying them and that, what have you. So, and now and again you still see big Snowie\rquote s wagons. oh that\rquote s another little thought Snowie\rquote s wagons.  When the foot and mouth outbreak was at it\rquote s height, Snowie
\rquote s he\rquote s another big contract firm, you probably know it, they were told to buy and he bought lots more wagons \lquote cos they\rquote d be needing some and lots more equipment. Well there now that it\rquote 
s all finished and a lot of the tidying up work has, has, has gone, they have things standing idle.  So they were going to sell them to get back some working capital, and they had this big auction arranged and }{\f0\insrsid15357526 [daughter\rquote 
s fianc\'e9]}{\f0\insrsid5984899  came in the other night and he was telling }{\f0\insrsid15357526 [husband?]}{\f0\insrsid5984899 , he said er, oh he said, Snowie\rquote s got a phone call, the auction was the next day, \'93Don\rquote t sell anything\'94
 ... No explanation as far as we know, but you see this filters down through the guys you know.  It all gets, people don\rquote t realise how much the men talk, you know and it just takes one or t
wo to say something and it, it gets filtered right through.  So erm, so, the auction\rquote s called off and they\rquote re still sitting there with all their stuff you know, they haven\rquote t sold it ...can you understand why people think it\rquote 
s not finished yet? (laughs) 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 And there\rquote s a group of cabins down in the old airfield site at Howburn, is that DEFRA?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes, oh yes we still see them going in, when, they\rquote re not in their white suits now.  Do you know I get a, if I see a man, in a white suit, especially if it\rquote s got a hood 
up, I get a cold shiver down, my hair stands on, on end on the back of my neck.  I saw too many, standing outside too many farms, \lquote cos you never knew why they were there.  You just knew it was probably not a, not a good reason, erm, no
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 How are the children now?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Erm, the town children, it\rquote s past, it\rquote s passed them by now.  and it\rquote s only the ones who either, still haven\rquote t got any animals or they\rquote re getting animals, they\rquote 
re getting the animals back again, they get quite excited about it and they talk about it among other things, you might get some pictures drawn and things like that. erm, If they haven\rquote t, if they still haven\rquote 
t got animals like, a big farm, erm, they, and, and a couple of young \lquote uns, you find that unless you specifically ask, they don\rquote t mention it, they just, it\rquote s like they\rquote re just marking time, and I think that\rquote 
s probably what their parent\rquote s are doing as well, just marking time for a while. Erm, I think some of the farmers have decided well it\rquote s not such a bad idea to get up at eight o\rquote clock in
 the morning instead of half past five, and I can\rquote t blame them for that one.  Erm, and I think some of them are definitely not going to restock.  Er but not so many in this area because it is a very very big farming area, and I think I\rquote 
ve only seen one farm for sale so far.  Er, but there\rquote s been a lot of moving houses, on the, in the area, you know you see them for sale where it\rquote s, it\rquote s pretty slow from the housing market round here because there\rquote 
s not that many houses and people tend to stay put when they get somewhere as nice as this.  Erm, but there\rquote 
s two or three houses gone on the market as well so, er, things, gradually, gradually I'm seeing a few more animals, probably (inaudible 689) but still not many, nowhere near the amount there was. I mean you w
ent past a field and every field had sheep, and you can, I can go past in my car now and count ten or twelve fields I can see, and there\lquote ll be one with sheep. And the cattle are still inside anyway, well if it\rquote s a nice day they\rquote 
ll put them out. But er, I\rquote m looking forward to spring proper, because it\rquote s not spring proper up here \lquote 
til about April fool.  (laughs) Because all the sheep round here will be producing their lambs and they run around on the field here I mean I\rquote ve even had them walking in the porch, you know, erm, they, there\rquote 
s always been (emotional here, inaudible 697) \lquote cos that is the true breath of spring.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 But do you feel as though you\rquote re coming out the other side, \lquote cos it clearly has affected you?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yeah I didn\rquote t realise quite how much maybe.  Erm, yes I think there\rquote s a little bit of light at the end of the tunnel providing all these stories that we keep hearing, don\rquote 
t come to anything and (inaudible 704) . I mean, people you\rquote ve seen sort of virtually every day for, five years you know, see them in the middle of winter still smiling give you a wave and they\rquote re soaked to the skin and they\rquote 
re fighting these silly sheep into fields.  When you saw them, as it was last spring, beautiful spring weather all these lovely wild flowers, beautiful green grass
 and buds on the trees and the birds were singing, and, I can, I can hardly, they were just grey, and they didn\rquote t want to smile, what they\rquote 
ve been through. But I just hope that it just all stays away again, stays away for a long long time in fact I hope they try and see new. I mean we get vaccinated to stop us getting disease why can\rquote t they, I can\rquote t understand why there\rquote 
s this thing against vaccination, and it was only because we couldn\rquote t export if they\rquote d been vaccinated, well, I, I\rquote ve got to say that I don\rquote t understand, I mean does it affect meat?
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Well at that stage it all (inaudible 716)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yeah, so, they, they, I think they are doing, I think (phone rings) if I remember rightly, I\rquote ll let somebody else get that, say they\rquote re vaccinated I think what they\rquote re s
aying is they can then still carry the disease out so if they go out live, they can give this disease to animals in other countries, so why not just vaccinate them as well? I mean they vaccinated all the cattle in South Africa for Indepest (?) so why can
\rquote t we do it here? I just can\rquote t, see that if, if it was, if it would be decided that everything was vaccinated in the whole of Europe, what, what, where\rquote 
s the problem, and there, I now of course the last thing is brucellosis is here, reappeared, oh yeah, and it\rquote s in Cumbria erm
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I heard there was some somewhere that tested positive (inaudible 725)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 I thought they, oh maybe it wasn\rquote t TB now I might have that wrong, but again,
\par 
\par }\pard \s20\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1\widctlpar\tx993\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\insrsid5984899 (Inaudible 727) \lquote Cos we haven\rquote t had that many (inaudible 727)
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 No, I don\rquote 
t think, We drove home the other night my daughter was driving, it had been raining and it was dark and the road was half washed you know, just like it was tonight. And she, and we came up to a farm entrance, it was Dykes Head Farm, and she said \'93
Oh no! Mum!\'94  just like that, I said \'93What\rquote s the matter what\rquote s the matter?\'94  \lquote Cos I was like you know, obviously.  And it was all these cones round Dykes Head Farm and there was this big notice up, but you couldn\rquote 
t read it.  I mean we were past it, and she said \'93Oh that wasn\rquote t a DEFRA notice was it? It wasn\rquote t was it?\'94  And she got really upset.  And when my husband got home I said to him you know \'93
Did you see, did you go past Dykes Head, did you see the cones?\'94  And, and, he said \'93It\rquote s a Water Board notice\'94, and we all \'93Oh\'94
, because it just hits you.  I mean, I see those little vans, and those men, (laugh) oh no!. So I think, I think Cumbrian farmers, the Cumbrian people who\rquote ve lived here all the time, I think they deserve some luck, so they want to see the good side
 now. Other people down in Devon, \lquote cos there\rquote s a lot there have had a lot of problems. But, erm, I mean I still don\rquote t understand how the deer didn\rquote 
t get it round here, we have hundreds of deer round here, hundreds, I mean they eat everything in my front garden, 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 There\rquote s a lot of forestry
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par Yes, they\rquote re all over, in the forest, and so how did they not get it when it was supposed to be, so virulent and so infectious? And all these animals were supposed to have it, how did the deer not get it? Because they\rquote 
re not immune to it, that\rquote s another question that (inaudible 748)
\par  Malcolm reckons we\rquote ll find out in thirty years time when the er, the boxes are opened but, I said \'93I probably won\rquote t be here by then, I like them opened in five years!\'94  (laughter) \'93then at least I\rquote ll know what happened\'94
, you know.  I find that really hard that they can, hide things for thirty years, I think that\rquote s dreadful.  I want that changed. It might be supposedly for, I suppose it\rquote s probably for our own benefit. Not sure that that\rquote s goi
ng to wash, might wash if you\rquote re a politician with things to hide, but not if you\rquote re a member of the public who wants to know. Mm, but, (inaudible 756) It\rquote d be nice to see a few happy farmers around here again. And they\rquote 
e all doing these things they hate doing, like ditching and hedging \lquote cos they\rquote 
ve got nothing else to do, and I have never seen so many bales of silage made as there was last year. I mean even Malcolm there, two and a half thousand bales of silage, I said \'93How did you do it?\'94 but, and I mean he hadn\rquote 
t lost his, and he just said \'93It just grew and grew and grew\'94. I tell you what we did see lots of, while everything was at its height and that was hawks and other birds of prey, lots of them. And Alan was saying that this idea that you know they ki
lled the cattle and, came and got them a few days later and everything was just perfect.  He said you know we were sent in to erm, chase the rats out first, and he said and the rooks, the crows he said, erm.  I mean if you leave a heap of sheep, dead shee
p like it\rquote s only going to take a crow two minutes to spot that and they\rquote re all in.  So, how they could say that that wouldn\rquote t spread it, and the rats couldn\rquote t spread I, I do not know, but, no, I don\rquote 
t quite quite accept what I\rquote m being told. I\rquote ve got a bit (long pause) cynical?  A bit of Alzheimer\rquote s creeping in here, it\rquote s been a long
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 I must have kept you at least an hour I think
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 No I don\rquote t think, I never wear a watch. I do not, I gave up about ten years ago, I found I was doing this all the time, (looks at her wrist) looking at it all the time and I thought, there\rquote 
s a clock in every room in this school, why do I need a watch?  That\rquote s it
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Is there anything else
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 No, I think I\rquote m talked out. (tape off/on) 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 You had offers of an artist in residence
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Oh an artist to come and do things with, with the children to help them get over the, problems if they had any, with foot and mouth, but we applied for it and didn\rquote t get it.  Like Longtown? I ask you, we applied and didn
\rquote t get it.  Erm, an Australian film company came
, to film about foot and mouth disease.  Now the big farm that went first, one of the boys in my class, they, they went there and they spoke to the mum and dad and the children. And, they were so impressed with mum and everything, they said was there anyt
hing they could do, what happened in the end was, they gave her five hundred pounds which she gave to school, which we took the children out with.  So they got taken out one day, because all their normal trips and things were all cancelled, couldn\rquote 
t do anything, so we spent the money thanks to her and this Australian company.  But we didn\rquote 
t anything like that from our own Government or, anybody round about, nobody said oh you know.  But somebody went in, in, in one of the half terms or, or in, the termly bre
ak and did things down at the centre with the children.  But, not all the children could go, you know, it was only if the parents were willing to take them or something like that you know.  So only some went and did it, not everybody.  So I think erm, and
 there was film, other companies came and they wanted to talk to different, to children and they made a little thing of that as well, er somebody else, but nothing came of that. But I thought \lquote 
well it takes an Australian film company to realise that our children need a little something\rquote , so they gave this lady five hundred pounds because she\rquote 
d been so good to them and helped them.  And she, because she, she was one of our Governors and they\rquote d said to them \lquote well I think the school should use the money\rquote . Our i
nfants were all taken out for the day, mind the only place we could take them was the Sands Centre in Carlisle, so and they all got their lunch and everything, had a, a nice day out, but erm, nothing else, I mean nothing
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Was there any sort of counselling offered for children?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Not as far as I know
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Do you know if it\rquote s been offered to anybody else?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Well, certainly hasn\rquote t been offered to my son-in-law and son-in-law to be and they were working right at the dirty end, nothing\rquote s been said to them ....so, I don\rquote t, it\rquote s just they\rquote 
re now digging up all the ash, they\rquote re on an ash retrieval
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Digging it up?
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Oh yes, can\rquote t leave it in the ground it might be contaminated.  So they\rquote re now digging up the ash, putting it in, some form of container, I can\rquote t remember whether it\rquote s, and, and then it\rquote 
s buried in concrete bunkers under the ground, \lquote cos they can\rquote t do anything else with it, because it might be contaminated.  They don\rquote t know whether burning the carcasses kills it, so anything that\rquote s gone there, has to be
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Does that mean the ash that has been buried already is now being dug up?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Is now being dug up, yeah, ... I mean he was on that for a while and he used to come in, I mean he, he\rquote s in a cab, and he used to come in coated with it.  Er, before he went on that he was ac
tually sent for a medical and I said are they sending you for a medical after it and he said I don\rquote t think so.  (laugh) Well, I can\rquote t work that one out, so as far as I know most of the guys have worked with it, haven\rquote 
t had any extra medicals, attention or tests, or\'85And I think they should\rquote 
ve taken blood tests before they started and taken blood tests at regular intervals for the next five years or something, just in case.  I mean, nobody knew about asbestos for a long time, I mean what happens if this stuff does get in your lungs, \lquote 
cos they all breathed it in, we all did, I mean we couldn\rquote t escape it, so, erm, it won\rquote t affect everybody but who\rquote s to tell? (laughs)
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 The children with asthma ?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 Yes they had, when, when the burnings were going on, they were right round the whole time. I mean you couldn\rquote t go in the town, out the town without going past fires, and erm, the children with asthma were having trouble.  
\lquote Cos I had a little girl who I knew her Mummy quite well, and her mum, her mum used to come in and help me, and she used to come in, and her mum used to be in a really bad way too.  It was just the burning
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid5984899 Did you actually have children staying off or having to go to hospital?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid5984899 I don\rquote t think so, we, we\rquote re quite lucky we don\rquote t many with asthma  and those who\rquote ve got it, didn\rquote t seem to, it was only one or two it affected you could see affecting you know, \lquote cos they
\rquote d use their inhalers a lot more well that usually means that, erm, (inaudible 8
44) a lot more, but it affected the mum quite badly, she needed, I mean, you never saw her you know using her inhaler or anything and she used to come and help but, when she\rquote d come in and she\rquote 
d got inside she had to go and use it, and settle down for a bit and calm and let it start to ease. So, but erm, other than that I can\rquote t, I can\rquote 
t think that there were any sort of difficulties well other than the fact that some of the children were sick, you know they did the mums the same, you know they were sick.  you know the smell walking in, one or two on the way to school.}{
\b\f0\insrsid5984899 
\par }}