{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial,Bold;}{\f98\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f99\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f101\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f102\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f103\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f104\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f105\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f106\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f111\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f113\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \sbasedon10 line number;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 header;}{\s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar
\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 footer;}{\*\cs18 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}{
\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 \ssemihidden footnote text;}{\*\cs20 \additive \super \sbasedon10 \ssemihidden footnote reference;}}
{\*\rsidtbl \rsid65782\rsid884482\rsid1849962\rsid2625273\rsid3289787\rsid3497254\rsid4212715\rsid4345773\rsid8467288\rsid8858363}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6775;}{\info{\title So are you saying}{\author L J & S J Coughtrey}{\operator UKDA}
{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy10\hr14\min33}{\revtim\yr2006\mo8\dy4\hr16\min11}{\printim\yr2002\mo3\dy15\hr7\min53}{\version9}{\edmins8}{\nofpages16}{\nofwords4483}{\nofchars25559}{\*\company Home}{\nofcharsws29983}{\vern16391}}
\paperw11900\paperh16820\margl2552\margr1701 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow0
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot4345773 \fet0{\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\insrsid3497254 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\ftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid3497254 \chftnsepc 
\par }}{\*\aftnsep \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid3497254 \chftnsep 
\par }}{\*\aftnsepc \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid3497254 \chftnsepc 
\par }}\sectd \psz9\sbknone\linemod5\linex0\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\f0\fs20\insrsid3497254 Study Name: The Health and Social Consequences of the 2001 FMD Epidemic in North Cumbria.\tab \tab :
\par Depositor: }{\f0\fs20\insrsid4345773 Lancaster University}{\f0\fs20\insrsid3497254 
\par Interview ID:  PM16
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \s17\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs18\insrsid3497254 PAGE  }
}{\fldrslt {\cs18\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof\insrsid3289787 16}}}{\cs18\insrsid3497254 
\par }\pard \s17\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\insrsid3497254 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid3497254 
\par Date of Interview: 07/03/02
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\ul\insrsid3497254 
\par Information about Panel Member
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Date of birth: 1951
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid3497254 Gender: M
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid3497254 Occupation: Group 5}{\cs20\f0\super\insrsid3497254 \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs20\f0\fs20\super\insrsid3497254 \chftn }{\f0\fs20\insrsid3497254  }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Group 1 }{
\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Farmers, farm-workers and their families
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Group 2 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Small businesses, to include tourism, arts and crafts, retail and others.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Group 3 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Related agricultural workers to include livestock hauliers, agricultural   contractors and    auction mart staff}{
\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 .
\par Group 4 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Front line workers, to include DEFRA, Environment Agency, slaughter teams (temporary, seconded and permanent).
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Group 5 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Community, to include teachers, clergy, residents near disposal sites.
\par }{\b\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Group 6 }{\f0\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 Health professionals, to include, GPs, community nurses & veterinary practitioners.}{
\f36\lang2057\langfe2057\langfenp2057\insrsid3497254 
\par }}}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid3497254 Geographic region: North Cumbria}{\insrsid3497254 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\f0\insrsid3497254 (The tape starts a couple of minutes into conversation about FMD)
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par In a crisis situation the first thing th
at you would normally do, as clergy, is go, to be alongside people in their pain and it was the one thing that you couldn't do.  One of the very difficult things was to really discover what was going on for individual farmers.  When you talked to people, 
you look at them, you see what they are really saying, what the subtext is.  You know, by all the physical signals and the whites of people\rquote 
s eyes.  Often it is just as you got your hand on the door to go that the real problem surfaces and a telephone relat
ionship is less than adequate for spotting those signals.  You know what I mean.  So you spent hours on the phone but not quite knowing whether what you were doing was any good.  As I said, farmers are stoical and not given to necessarily opening up.  I d
on\rquote t know whether it is unique to the Cumbrian community, perhaps it is Cumbrian\rquote s generally.  I had a wonderful story early in my Ministry here. Somebody complained to one of my churchwardens, that I hadn\rquote 
t been to visit a lady.  He said does he know that she is ill.  He said have you told him and she said no I haven\rquote t, I don\rquote t know whether he knows or not and anywhere she doesn\rquote 
t want him to go and see her anyway.  You know when the clergy turns up only when you are dying. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Do you think that farmers are pretty stoical anyway?
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par Yes they are.  Self-reliant for sure.  
\par 
\par It was also interesting that often - I have this list of farmers that I rang, about 30, locally in my parishes.  I sat down about 7 o\rquote clock in the evening.  I kept a daily record of which farm
ers I had been able to talk to the day before and I talked to everybody regularly over the course of a week.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\insrsid3497254 How many farms?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 About thirty.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 I see.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 It was interesting I\rquote d start at the top of the list. Although there was a gap for the day before, and some
 nights I could go through the list for an hour before I managed to get hold of one: they were engaged.  They talked to each other, which was tremendous really.  They were, in many ways, their own salvation.  Because they were able to talk to their farmin
g friends and associates they were able to relieve the pressure.  
\par 
\par One of the farmers I talk to regularly}{\f0\insrsid8467288 , }{\f0\insrsid3497254 at Yanwath Woodhouse just this side of Penrith.  His farm is within \'be of a mile of the first outbreak in the Penrith area at Topbridge.  T
hat pyre at Topbridge burned for 6 weeks.  Most of the time smoke was going over his farm.  The minute it hit Topbridge he sealed his farm and nothing came on to it and nothing went off it and in the whole of the period of this outbreak he left the farm o
n 6 occasions.  Incredible.  For the best part of 8 months he came off the farm 6 times.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Did he escape FMD?
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \li0\ri0\sl360\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\f0\insrsid3497254 I think that had as much to do with \endash 
 who knows, nobody knows do they.  Whether it is luck, whether it was bio security or it was a combination o
f the two.  But his farm is kind of isolated, it is not a farmstead with buildings and what have you and where the stock, dairy cattle, his breeding cattle are about I suppose \'be
 of a mile from the road.  It is incredible.  But it was all that they could do.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 It is interesting you should mention about farmers talking to each other, I think a there was some expectation amongst health professionals that there were would be an increased demand for services, which as yet hasn\rquote 
t really materialised.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I am not sure that they won\rquote 
t and I think yeah whether they will materialise or not or whether they will be internalised.  It is difficult to know, really.  I mean I look round my farmers and the ones who went down and the ones who survived and I think for
 a time there was a lot of conflict emotionally.  Those who did succumbed to foot and mouth in a sense, they felt a sense of relief because it was like a time bomb or it was like a cancer.  They knew that there was a possibility that they would die.  When
 
it happened they were just so relieved that it had. But at the same time those who were still hanging on, who were living with the same fear of death lurking around the corner also felt guilty because they were still there.  I think for a while, in the la
te summer and the early autumn people were afraid that it would be a tension that would affect relationships between farming families.  But that didn\rquote t seem to materialise.
\par 
\par Two particular farming families have been long friends.  The }{\f0\insrsid8858363 [people]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  at Highfield survived, but }{\f0\insrsid8858363 [another family]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  they went down,  I know that the }{\f0\insrsid8858363 
[others too]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  were a bit concerned about how their relationship with their friends would be affected and it served to strengthen the friendship which was\'85
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 How do you think relationships have changed?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 What 
I found heartening was that it drew the community together.  Or the communities, each village is individual and unique. People talk about the Dunkirk spirit and I suppose it was something of that sort.  Everybody was concerned about their neighbours and t
heir friends.  People made what contact they could with each other.  People behaved differently.  They weren\rquote 
t as casual about the things - like making journeys and that sort of thing that they might otherwise have been because they wanted to do for the farming community whatever they could.  
\par 
\par I don\rquote t think that they quite as aware of the effect on the other aspects of the community, the tourist side of things and the local shop.  But I think those effects are only just beginning to emerge.  One of the pubs in the village has closed, in 
}{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{\f0\insrsid3497254 .  The landlord declared himself bankrupt, but then how do you service \'a341,000 a year rent when there are no customers.  
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid1849962 [village] }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Church is really very heavily visited one of the ?? churches and last year between the beginning of March and the end of September, in the visitors book, there was \'be
 of a page of entries as opposed to the year before when there were 35 pages.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 That\rquote s incredible.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Yes and that is an indication of the ... I mean, the people who come in, they can have a tour, they have a drink and a bite to eat and pop into the shop and these people are just not there.  It didn\rquote 
t effect that side of the community immediately.  I think it is only now that those particular side affects are being felt.  On the other hand the local b&b\rquote 
s and what have you are saying that their booking are healthy this year.  I think that the tourist side of the equation have realised, have recognised, how much they took for granted the people who pay their rent.  We as a church did that to
 some extent, but yes in this group of parishes.  Going back to the entries in the visitors book, for example, the difference between \'be of a page last year and 35 pages the year before and what is there when the visitor comes to look at the chur
ch.  Well the building, but that is all there is they are not helped to understand the experience and from the churches perspective we too have taken visitors for granted and not enhanced their experience of coming.  This is a discovery that the tourist i
ndustry have made, brutally.  
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I think, in a sense we are fortunate here because we are not a honey pot tourist centre, not the big hotels or the touristy shop centres. The local b&b\rquote s are largely tied to farming.  You know the diversification for a lot of
 farmers, the wives do that.  The small b&b\rquote s that we have got are an adjunct to jobs that people are already doing in the community.  They had an income they weren\rquote t dependent on tourist\rquote s coming and staying , it wasn\rquote 
t their main income, livelihood so people largely got by.  But saying that they reckon they have got 18 months \endash  post September 11}{\f0\super\insrsid3497254 th}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
.  People will be looking to vacation in this country perhaps maybe than they would otherwise have done.  They reckon they have got 18 months to capitalise on that possibility and I think they are right.  
\par 
\par You know foot and mouth has galvanised people in a way into really taking stock of where they where and where they want to be and what is that best way forward.  I think there is a lot more willingness to coope
rate and to see the benefits of working collaboratively rather than competitively.  I think people can see that they may well be more successful working together than they were trying to work in isolation and it is more cost-effective, more, all sorts of 
spin-offs for them as individuals and as a group.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Can you remember when the outbreak was first announced and what your thoughts were at that time?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Yes, I didn\rquote t know you heard of foot and mouth.  I don\rquote t really remember the outbreak in 67 except that it happened somewhere other than where I was, it didn\rquote t impinge so in a sense I didn\rquote 
t quite what to expect.  The knowledge of it didn\rquote t particularly disturb me in the early days.  I thought oh gosh, how sad, you know.  It wasn\rquote t until there were outbreaks o
n our own doorstep and the first funeral pyre on our doorstep.  Then the first outbreak in one of my parishes and that is when it really began to hit home.  So I suppose it would be the second week in March, yes next week will be the anniversary when the 
f
irst outbreak in my parishes took place.  A young couple in Helden who had only just .. they had only been in farming for about 5 years and I was very afraid I think because he was quite a highly strung sort of guy and his commitment to making  that endea
vour a success was huge.  I really was quite afraid for him and I rang them every day in the ??   
\par 
\par It was then that you began to think about the implications for the county as a whole and not just the local community.  I think yes from the Softbridge outbreak we were just kind of glued to the radio, BBC Radio Cumbria.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Everybody seems to have listened to Radio Cumbria, what do you think of their coverage?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
Absolutely tremendous.  They, it was really Anne Hopper if you wanted accurate information, of which there was very little, she seemed to be able to distil from the chaos that was coming out of MAFF.  There were hourly bulletins and everybody, we included
,
 glued to the radio. You live with the constant knotted stomach and the sense of anticipation, of fear, of who is going to be next and you listen to the bulletins - have ours gone down or have they not.  It was the sole topic of conversation in the pub, i
n the village, in the shop.  Nobody could talk about anything else.  Absolutely, it just took over everybody\rquote s waking hours and often their sleeping hours as well.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 How did your working day change?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 It changed in the sense that instead of zipping backward and forwards across the parish that I might otherwise have done, I didn\rquote t make journeys that were unnecessary.  I went to a location say into }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{
\f0\insrsid3497254 , or into Lowther or into Clifton or into Broom and worked from there, as I was able to.  I didn\rquote t go to meetings, and we are in the Deanery of }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 which extends from  Belmond Bridge down to Kirkby Stephen and through a huge area.  I stopped going to chaplaincy  meetings and to Deanery meetings because this is actually a farm, we live on a farm.  This is the Earl of Lonsdale\rquote 
s home farm and they farm 3.1/2,000 acres all round. So I felt that I had to be as aware of the need for bio-security as everybody else who worked on a farm.  So what I was able to do, was to some extent limited but that not necessarily the same.  I 
could disinfect I could go in the village, I could go and visit people who weren\rquote t farmers.  I could respond to their needs and what-have-you.  So, in a sense, my working pattern didn\rquote t really change fundamentally.  I think we were just so 
\'85 like everybody else we were fear, that is not the right word, I don\rquote t know we were immobilised by it.  You felt that you didn\rquote t dare go anywhere, you didn\rquote 
t want to go anywhere because nobody really knew how it was moving from place to place.  Powerless.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 A loss of control?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Sure, that is right and it was really quite a distressing time because you didn\rquote t know whether any change you made.  You didn\rquote t know if you passed a field whether you would somehow pick it up of the ... oh I don\rquote 
t know, it was bizarre.  As much as anything it was down to the fact that there was so little accurate information about how the thing was spread or indeed how it wasn\rquote 
t spread.  The rumours, I know that farmers in my patch found things in their fields where they oughtn\rquote t to be there.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Nobody 
knew where it come from or how it got there but it was there. Conspiracy theories were rife and there was a lot of tension here.  It was a huge sheep area and the voluntary cull, voluntary in inverted commas, was strongly opposed by a number of farmers in
 
the Lowther valley for different reasons.  For moral, for economics reasons you know.  There were a number of farmers who made themselves very unpopular because they were unwilling to respond positively to the cull.  I think ultimately everybody did but s
ome of them made a big stink about it and hung on and hung on and whether it was a result of that I don\rquote t know, people making themselves unpopular with their neighbours.
\par 
\par I suppose in a sense farming has always been, to a degree, a cooperative thing.  Next 
doors neighbours will help each other out and will respond to each others needs at sileaging, hay time or you know, what have you.  A degree of cooperation has always been necessary to enable the farming community to work successfully and when people stop
 cooperating or are believed to have stopped being cooperative in some way then tension inevitably arised, but I mean they were difficult times.  I was never called on to mediate but it was a close call. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Really.
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par Once or twice, just as it was looking as i
f I would might have to go and do some head banging things settled down.  That was difficult, when they diminished the whole of the community.  It was always potentially incredibly difficult, impossible to balance it.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 It was a volatile situation, which I guess was compounded by a lack of information.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Sure, and conflicting information.  People saying that the cull wasn\rquote t necessary, that they should vaccinate, homeopathic things.  That foot and mouth liked cold, wet and you know warm dry, didn\rquote t like acid  
conditions so there were ways of creating acidic environment so you could keep stock safely and then everyone else saying is that necessarily true.  All these kinds of things, these issues that were in the melting pot.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Do you think the science was conflicting?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
Yes, basically, I am not at all sure that there was any science full stop, frankly.  I think the whole thing was just too huge and too out of control for anybody to make any sense of anything or indeed to believe anything.  You have got the governme
nt saying we have got it under control when it quite obviously wasn\rquote t.  I mean DEFRA spent months chasing the leads. I am not sure at the end of the day that they understood what was going on any better than anybody else did.  I don\rquote 
t know - all sorts of conspiracy theories but to some extent it was actually convenient to let it get out of control because of subsidy payments, too many sheep and all sorts.  Whether that is true or not \endash  who knows.  I don\rquote 
t think that anybody learnt any lessons from the 67 ou
tbreak, but the fact that the source of the outbreak or at least as far as as Cumbria is concerned, the Longtown Mart and the stock that went through there.  The  quantity of stock was colossal, just so huge. }{\f0\insrsid65782 
 I mean the guy at Stockbridge}{\f0\insrsid3497254 , he
 had a throughput of something like 75,000 sheep a year and 90% of them came through Longtown Mart.  So whatever happened, because there was an outbreak, it was going to be huge in the county.  It couldn\rquote 
t have been avoided but nobody seemed to put 2 and 2
 together.  By the time they brought the army in the thing was just so big and bigger than they could begin to imagine.  It had already overtaken the county and the resources that were available.  I suppose if the whole world had stopped and they had thro
wn the resources at it, the world\rquote s best, they still would have not caught up with it any faster than maybe they did.  In a sense it amplified peoples anxiety.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 About farming in general?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 No, I think about their inability to control the situation, that the situation was in control of them.  That heightened peoples anxiety.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 I think a lot of people said that the worse thing for them was the loss of control, the waiting\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 The uncertainty. What can I do about this \endash  I can do nothing.  I have bio security, they banged on about disinfection.  Always, in every conversation they would say none of it is doing any good, but I am keeping doing it.

\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 What did you see your role as?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 My role was no differ
ent than it is on any day to day basis, I think, and that is to be there for people.  To be available, to talk, to play with them, to do whatever I can to enable them to live their lives hopefully  in a degree of normality.  So I was a listening ear, I wa
s a shoulder to cry on if they wanted to.  I was an agent of communication between different parts of the community.   Have you spoken to so and so, how was so and so \endash 
 you know.  The information was disseminated largely through the village shop which is a talking place about the village.  To lead acts of worship which allowed people who weren\rquote 
t involved directly in the farming community to share something of the grief and the pain of those who were incarcerated on their farmsteads, just generally to be a pastor.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 I guess to try and to help them through\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 The crisis, in whatever way I could.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 So what helped you through the crisis?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I don\rquote t know, God.  I think a family, who were concerned and were also a sharing \'85   I mean my wife, a clerygman\rquote 
s wife, she is a non-stipendary minister and she was working in a parish in Baker which is just the other side of the A66 and she couldn\rquote 
t go for six months.  So for six months she was here, at home and she kept a web diary for Radio Cumbrian broadcast, sh
e did a broadcast for them on how it was affecting us.  That was very useful, a lot of people found that very helpful.   I think there was a lot of support here.  
\par 
\par The question of who pastored the pastor has always been a very thorny one.  I have a friend who is a consultant psychotherapist and she said that she wouldn\rquote 
t let her psychotherapists do what the clergy do with the lack of support that they actually have.  And this is true.  It has always been so, who pastors the pastor and the answer is you are
 lucky if there is somebody there with whom you feel able to share what is going on inside you because it is about confidence and trust.  I suppose at the end of the day the support was here in the home and also in the community.  I think people were them
selves more open and more willing to talk.  
\par 
\par It was quite interesting that in pubs guys would talk about how they were feeling, how it was affecting them so you were able to say funny that is just how I am feeling, what about so and so.    But it was still
 the same kind of situation, you were still in a pastoral role because you were trying to help them to open up a bit more.  So, although it was a kind of therapy in itself it was also a version of work.  Do you know what I mean?  Then you are never off du
ty really unless you actually go away, away.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 I remember at the focus group you told a story about blessing some sheep.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 The sheep.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Yes, the sheep, it was a fascinating story.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 It was incredible.  It was in the early days of the outbreak and a farmer had just gone down at Hebden and this was a farm \'bd mile on over the brow top and }{\f0\insrsid2625273 [name]}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 rang me up in floods of tears.  They wanted to cull all their sheep.  She had got this little flock of rare breed sheep that she farmed organically and she said they have got a soul.  So I said God created them whatever they \'85
 you know loved by God and they are part of his creation.  Tried to avoid the issue.  We will skate round that one.  And she said could I come a
nd say a prayer for her sheep.  So undaunted, I disinfected at the bottom and again down at her gate.  Round up the sheep and I say a prayer they all stood stock still and went silent and when I had finished they all rushed off and it was as if they knew.
  Crazy absolutely crazy, it was stupid, absolutely stupid. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 It must be a part of your job\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Yes, you encounter all sorts of odd things, odd attitudes, odd expectations, you do your best to respond in a way which is both orthodox and spiritual and right fo
r the situation and the circumstances.  There is no thing and nowhere that God is excluded from.  Wherever you go you encounter God either in life or death, in joy or suffering or whatever.  God is in there.  
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 One thing that interests me is the relationship between farmers and their animals, the complexities and the contradictions in that relationship.
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Do you think this confused the general public, after all the animals were going to be killed anyway? 
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I don\rquote t think that the farming community sees 
it in those black and white terms.  I think it is much more complicated and complex.  Farming is not, for most farmers, although they farm in the present they only farm in the present because of the history, that is an inherent part of that.  
\par 
\par When the }{\f0\insrsid884482 [farm]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  went down at Malaig, at Clifton Hall, I rang }{\f0\insrsid884482 [farmer]}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 to see how he was and the most painful thing he said was that 90 years of breeding gone in 2 hours.  That is the most difficult thing for most farmers.  A flock of sheep isn\rquote t just meat on the hoof and a dairy herd isn\rquote 
t just a milk producing enterprise, it is breeding, it is countless generations of care and selection and.. 
\par 
\par I think, it was }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [name]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  talking about his grandfather and how his grandfather had brought the original herd together.  How he bought cattle off people \endash  only people he knew and trusted \endash 
 how he selected the initial breeding stock and how they got many of their current cattle were Mabel the 23}{\f0\super\insrsid3497254 rd}{\f0\insrsid3497254 .  Do you know what I mean?  And it is not just about producing or mass-producing thing
s for the marketplace.  Well certainly not round here it is not.  Not among the dairy and the beef men, not amongst most of the sheep men.  They are not sheep dealers they are sheep breeders.  They have got rams, or they did have rams that had a particula
r bloodline that had been bred down the generations and they are irreplaceable.   I know they can buy livestock in but you can\rquote t replace that spirit and that link to the past.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Have you seen the mood of the community change through the events of last year?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
I think it depended on which side of the farm gate you stood.  In the sense that I think everybody felt that they were all in it together, every part of the community lived with the fear and the anxiety because everybody felt for everybody else and the ki
nd of...   When the height of the epidemic had passed and things were looking as if they were beginning to settle down people were involved in either maintaining the bio-security or cleaning out or what-have-you.  I am not sure that there was ever a reall
y
 difficult, deep low period from which things climbed, you know what I mean.  But sure, everybody was surprisingly positive whatever happens they used to say whatever happens we are not going to let this beat us.  I think those farmers who lost their stoc
k and are now beginning to restock are positive, hopeful and those that didn\rquote t loose their stock are thankful.  There is a sense of hope beginning to emerge although people are not over \'85
 they are still cautious.  There is still a very real sense of we are not convinced that it really is over yet and there is a great air of caution.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Restocking is a difficult time for lots of reasons, once you get over the initial euphoria of having stock again\'85
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 And you don\rquote t know, when I talked with the estate farm manager, he said when they were starting to restock they didn\rquote t \'85
 they managed to keep their beef cattle which are miles away in the middle of the park miles from anywhere.  They started to restock the sheep, he said mind you they are rare old hotch-potch I don\rquote 
t know what they will do this year.  But then they were restocking 3\'bd,000 ewes and 2 thousand lambs at Butt and well there were 1500 ewes and 2000 lambs at Butt and another 1500 pregnant ewes all slaughtered on one day.  The wagons were up and dow
n the country one afternoon.  
\par Absolutely horrendous, four hours of riding backwards and forward.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 What do you think was the worse thing about last year?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 It was one day - 22}{\f0\super\insrsid3497254 nd}{\f0\insrsid3497254  of August - and it was terrible.  Some parishioners were having their golden wedding and they were having a service of blessing in }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{
\f0\insrsid3497254  and then they were having a do at the pub, at one of the pubs in the village.  So the night before at the farm opposite th
e pub, I had been out to open and lock the church.   I had been to lock the church up and I popped in the pub for a pint. it was August 21}{\f0\super\insrsid3497254 st}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 about quarter past nine, and there was a vet and I thought, hello trouble.  The vet didn\rquote t come at quarter past nine unless there was trouble.  So I came home and said to I think }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 Gate has gone done there was a vet there and we got this golden wedding and people coming from all over the country and all over the world. What will they do and in the end I asked the }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 vet to come round they didn\rquote 
t cancel.  We had the blessing and I asked people to leave their cars by the church and walk up to the village, it was only 500 yards wherever possible and they were very good about that.  And there was this celebration going on and I just couldn\rquote 
t be part of it, we couldn\rquote t be part of it somehow.  And we went out, the sun shone and the guns went off, you could smell the blood in the air and the wagons came and then the word came that }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [farmer]}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 had lost them all, killed all as contiguous and his wife had died at home..  the had culled all the lambs and she had died during the night.  Unbelievable it was just unbelievable and we just couldn\rquote 
t celebrate.  Villagers came and stood on the cross by the post office and we just stood, there weren\rquote t any words.  We went home eventually to the family.
\par 
\par And }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [wife]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  had been writing for an American publication on foot and mouth and they wanted pictures for one of the articles foot and mouth type of thing no gates with no entry and so on and 
she wanted to write a piece about this.  So I went back in the village with the camera, no I went back to the village to see if there were any wagons.  Sure enough there were wagons lined up either side of the road down through the village.  So I nipped h
o
me and said there are I got the camera and started taking photographs.  Then a police car arrived, followed me round the village and in the end he parked on one of the car parks by which time we had taken the photographs, so we got in the care and went ho
me.  But if we hadn\rquote t stopped they would have stopped us or tried to. And it turned out there was no film in the camera - ironic, very ironic.  Dreadful, dreadful day.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 How did you get through days like that?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I think you just do.  You know talking through and you get on with it like everybody else does in a sense.  I mean how can }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [farmer\rquote s wife]}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 die through the night and such a dreadful time for them.  And for the }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [farm]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  at }{\f0\insrsid4345773 A}{\f0\insrsid3497254 
 Gate because not only had they gone down with foot and mouth but their foot and mouth, they had had a helicopter and they had been so upset.   Not only had they gone down, but because they had gone the }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [other farm\rquote s]}{
\f0\insrsid3497254  stock had gone and then }{\f0\insrsid3289787 [farmer\rquote s wife]}{\f0\insrsid3497254  had died in the night and they felt somehow responsible and they weren\rquote t and they can\rquote t not feel, and they couldn\rquote 
t handle it.  It was a particularly low point for the village.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 What if anything positive came out of it?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 I think that was the single most significant thing.  That people \endash  it is difficult in a small village people are co-operative, they do look o
ut for each other but it strengthened that kind of relationship.  It made people aware of each other in a way that they weren\rquote 
t possibly previously.  It made people talk to each other, it made people open up to each other in a way that they probably hadn\rquote t
 done previously.  I think it will be in the long term that we will have to see what the legacy of the foot and mouth outbreak is.  I think in a sense it is too soon yet to know.  
\par 
\par Interestingly, I have been here now 14 years and our youngest daughter is ready to go to university.  I remember talking about the time to move on from here and we had come to the conclusion that we don\rquote 
t think we can that it would be unfair to the community.  It is too soon after the foot and mouth epidemic the long term conseq
uences of which are unclear.  It would be unfair for us who had lived through it alongside them to, in a sense, abandon them at this point and for someone to come in who didn\rquote 
t know or understand what they have been through.  And we are thinking we have recently made another 5 year commitment to be in this community because it might be \'85  you don\rquote 
t know how long it is going to take for them go over it, maybe they never will.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Do you think so?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Sure, but certainly I think we are looking to a longer-term comm
itment then we might otherwise have done. The psychological and the emotional and the physical consequence of it will take time.  When I talk to people about bereavement, and that is precisely what it is, bereavement for individual and for communities.  Y
ou have got to look at a minimum of two years to work through it.  Until communities are beginning to believe that it really is over they can\rquote 
t really get to grips.  So it is going to be protracted I think.  How we work through it only time will tell.I thin
k if communities are fortunate they will, to a greater or lesser extent, be able to work through the grieving process for themselves.  There always will be oddities, things that, I am going to have to stop inevitably.  I think ... I don\rquote 
t know, we shall have to wait and see.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 Is there anything that I haven\rquote t asked you that you think is important?
\par 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 Oh, gosh I don\rquote t know.  I don\rquote t know honestly.  I don\rquote t think so at this stage.
\par }{\b\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par }{\f0\insrsid3497254 
\par 
\par 
\par }}